Mutation screening of the RYR1 gene and identification of two novel mutations in Italian malignant hyperthermia families.
Point mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene are associated with malignant hyperthermia, an autosomal dominant disorder triggered in susceptible people (MHS) by volatile anaesthetics and depolarising skeletal muscle relaxants. To date, 17 missense point mutations have been identified in the human RYR1 gene by screening of the cDNA obtained from muscle biopsies. Here we report single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) screening for nine of the most frequent RYR1 mutations using genomic DNA isolated from MHS patients. In addition, the Argl63Cys mutation was analysed by restriction enzyme digestion. We analysed 57 unrelated patients and detected seven of the known RYR1 point mutations. Furthermore, we found a new mutation, Arg2454His, segregating with the MHS phenotype in a large pedigree and a novel amino acid substitution at position 2436 in another patient, indicating a 15.8% frequency of these mutations in Italian patients. A new polymorphic site in intron 16 that causes the substitution of a G at position -7 with a C residue was identified.
Screening of the ryanodine receptor gene in 105 malignant hyperthermia families: novel mutations and concordance with the in vitro contracture test.
Novel mutation in the RYR1 gene (R2454C) in a patient with malignant hyperthermia.
A novel ryanodine receptor mutation and genotype-phenotype correlation in a large malignant hyperthermia New Zealand Maori pedigree.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia type 2 (ARVD2, OMIM 600996) is an autosomal dominant cardiomyopathy, characterized by partial degeneration of the myocardium of the right ventricle, electrical instability and sudden death. The disease locus was mapped to chromosome 1q42--q43. We report here on the physical mapping of the critical ARVD2 region, exclusion of two candidate genes (actinin 2 and nidogen), elucidation of the genomic structure of the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (RYR2) and identification of RYR2 mutations in four independent families. In myocardial cells, the RyR2 protein, activated by Ca(2+), induces the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol. RyR2 is the cardiac counterpart of RyR1, the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor, involved in malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility and in central core disease (CCD). The RyR2 mutations detected in the present study occurred in two highly conserved regions, strictly corresponding to those where mutations causing MH or CCD are clustered in the RYR1 gene. The detection of RyR2 mutations causing ARVD2, reported in this paper, opens the way to pre-symptomatic detection of carriers of the disease in childhood, thus enabling early monitoring and treatment.
Identification of a novel mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) in patients with malignant hyperthermia.
Single-amino-acid deletion in the RYR1 gene, associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and unusual contraction phenotype.
Identification and functional characterization of a novel ryanodine receptor mutation causing malignant hyperthermia in North American and South American families.
Malignant hyperthermia is a pharmacogenetic disorder associated with mutations in Ca(2+) regulatory proteins. It manifests as a hypermetabolic crisis triggered by commonly used anesthetics. Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility is a dominantly inherited predisposition to malignant hyperthermia that can be diagnosed by using caffeine/halothane contracture tests. In a multigenerational North American family with a severe form of malignant hyperthermia that has caused four deaths, a novel RYR1 A2350T missense mutation was identified in all individuals testing positive for malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. The same A2350T mutation was identified in an Argentinean family with two known fatal MH reactions. Functional analysis in HEK-293 cells revealed an altered Ca(2+) dependence and increased caffeine sensitivity of the expressed mutant protein thus confirming the pathogenic potential of the RYR1 A2350T mutation.
North American malignant hyperthermia population: screening of the ryanodine receptor gene and identification of novel mutations.
Central core disease (CCD) is an autosomal dominant congenital myopathy. Diagnosis is based on the presence of cores in skeletal muscles. CCD has been linked to the gene encoding the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) and is considered to be an allelic disease of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. However, the report of a recessive form of transmission together with a variable clinical presentation has raised the question of the genetic heterogeneity of the disease. Analyzing a panel of 34 families exclusively recruited on the basis of both clinically and morphologically expressed CCD, 12 different mutations of the C-terminal domain of RYR1 have been identified in 16 unrelated families. Morphological analysis of the patients' muscles showed different aspects of cores, all of them associated with mutations in the C-terminal region of RYR1. Furthermore, we characterized the presence of neomutations in the RyR1 gene in four families. This indicates that neomutations into the RyR1 gene are not a rare event and must be taken into account for genetic studies of families that present with congenital myopathies type 'central core disease'. Three mutations led to the deletion in frame of amino acids. This is the first report of amino acid deletions in RYR1 associated with CCD. According to a four-transmembrane domain model, the mutations concentrated mostly in the myoplasmic and luminal loops linking, respectively, transmembrane domains T1 and T2 or T3 and T4 of RYR1.
The skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1; OMIM 180901) on chromosome 19q13.1 encodes the skeletal muscle calcium release channel. To date, more than 25 missense mutations have been identified in RYR1 and are associated with central core disease (CCD; OMIM 117000) and/or the malignant hyperthermia susceptibility phenotype (MHS1; OMIM 145600). The majority of RYR1 mutations are clustered in the N-terminal hydrophilic domain of the protein. Only four mutations have been identified so far in the highly conserved C-terminal region encoding the luminal/transmembrane domain of the protein which forms the ion pore. Three of these mutations have been found to segregate with pure or mixed forms of CCD. We have screened the C-terminal domain of the RYR1 gene for mutations in 50 European patients, diagnosed clinically and/or histologically as having CCD. We have identified five missense mutations (four of them novel) in 13 index patients. The mutations cluster in exons 101 and 102 and replace amino acids which are conserved in all known vertebrate RYR genes. In order to study the functional effect of these mutations, we have immortalized B-lymphocytes from some of the patients and studied their [Ca(2+)](i) homeostasis. We show that lymphoblasts carrying the newly identified RYR1 mutations exhibit: (i) a release of calcium from intracellular stores in the absence of any pharmacological activators of RYR; (ii) significantly smaller thapsigargin-sensitive intracellular calcium stores, compared to lymphoblasts from control individuals; and (iii) a normal sensitivity of the calcium release to the RYR inhibitor dantrolene. Our data suggest the C-terminal domain of RYR1 as a hot spot for mutations leading to the CCD phenotype. If the functional alterations of mutated RYR channels observed in lymphoblastoid cells are also present in skeletal muscles this could explain the predominant symptom of CCD, i.e. chronic muscle weakness. Finally, the study of calcium homeostasis in lymphoblastoid cells naturally expressing RYR1 mutations offers a novel non-invasive approach to gain insights into the pathogenesis of MH and CCD.
Novel mutations in C-terminal channel region of the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia patients.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;The ryanodine receptor of the skeletal muscle (RYR1) seems to be of outstanding importance in the pathogenesis of malignant hyperthermia (MH). It has been shown that point mutations in the RYR1 gene are strongly associated with the MH phenotype. A correctly determined phenotype is the basic prerequisite for adequate genetic MH screening. In this study we examined only those MH susceptible patients for the presence of potential RYR1 mutations who showed strong pathological muscle responses in the in vitro contracture test (IVCT).&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;A total of 56 MHS index patients who complied with the following IVCT criteria were included in the molecular genetic investigation: Contracture forces &gt; or =4 mN at a caffeine concentration of 2.0 mmol/l and &gt; or =8 mN at a halothane concentration of 0.44 mmol/l. DNA sequences of exons 2, 6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 39, 40, 45, 46, 102 of the RYR1 gene were analysed by the direct sequencing technique. Furthermore, if an MH mutation was identified in an index patient, all relatives were screened for their family specific RYR1 defect.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;In 39 index patients an RYR1 mutation was detected: Arg163Cys (n = 2), Asp166Asn (n = 1), Gly341Arg (n = 2), Arg401His (n = 2), Arg614Cys (n = 12), Asp2129Glu (n = 1),Vol2168Met (n = 1), Thr2206Met (n = 9), Ala2428Thr (n = 1), Gly2434Arg (n = 2), Arg2435His (n = 1), Arg2452Trp (n = 1), Arg2454His (n = 4). Three new RYR1 mutations were identified. We found a potential MH mutation in a further 130 relatives of the 39 index patients. Thirty-seven individuals were classified as MHS exclusively by molecular genetic techniques and did not have to undergo the IVCT.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The ascertained high rate of successful MH mutation screening (69.64%) is obviously associated with the more clearly defined MHS diagnosis in the IVCT. According to the EMHG guidelines for the molecular genetic detection of MH susceptibility, a positive MH disposition could be determined in numerous persons by a less invasive technique.
Mutation screening in the ryanodine receptor 1 gene (RYR1) in patients susceptible to malignant hyperthermia who show definite IVCT results: identification of three novel mutations.
Novel skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor mutation in a large Brazilian family with malignant hyperthermia.
Mutations in the RYR1 gene in Italian patients at risk for malignant hyperthermia: evidence for a cluster of novel mutations in the C-terminal region.
Presence of two different genetic traits in malignant hyperthermia families: implication for genetic analysis, diagnosis, and incidence of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
Scanning for mutations of the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene by denaturing HPLC: detection of three novel malignant hyperthermia alleles.
The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is an essential component of the calcium homeostasis of the skeletal muscle in mammals. Inactivation of the RYR1 gene in mice is lethal at birth. In humans only missense and in-frame mutations in the RYR1 gene have been associated so far with various muscle disorders including malignant hyperthermia, central core disease and the moderate form of multi-minicore disease (MmD). We identified a cryptic splicing mutation in the RYR1 gene that resulted in a 90% decrease of the normal RYR1 transcript in skeletal muscle. The 14646+2.99 kb A--&gt;G mutation was associated with the classical form of MmD with ophthalmoplegia, whose genetic basis was previously unknown. The mutation present at a homozygous level was responsible for a massive depletion of the RYR1 protein in skeletal muscle. The mutation was not expressed in lymphoblastoid cells, pointing toward a tissue specific splicing mechanism. This first report of an out-of-frame mutation that affects the amount of RYR1 raised the question of the amount of RYR1 needed for skeletal muscle function in humans.
Detection of a novel ryanodine receptor subtype 1 mutation (R328W) in a malignant hyperthermia family by sequencing of a leukocyte transcript.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;To determine whether malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility in a Canadian pedigree is associated with a mutation in the ryanodine receptor subtype 1 (RYR1) gene, the complete RYR1 transcript obtained from the leukocytes of one MH-susceptible family member was sequenced, using a newly developed protocol.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;RNA was extracted from leukocytes and converted into complementary DNA. Overlapping fragments of RYR1 complementary DNA were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction and used for double-strand sequencing to find a single mutation likely to be causal of MH susceptibility. Inheritance of the mutation in the family was studied by restriction endonuclease analysis and/or sequencing of genomic DNA and compared to available caffeine halothane contracture test data. The mutation was introduced into rabbit RYR1 complementary DNA, the complementary DNA was expressed in human embryonic kidney line 293 cells, and Ca2+ release by the mutant Ca2+ release channel was measured following the addition of caffeine and halothane.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;A novel arginine 328 to tryptophan mutation in RYR1 was detected by direct sequencing of the RYR1 transcript from leukocytes of one MH-susceptible individual. A causal role for this mutation in MH is indicated by cosegregation of the mutation with the MH-susceptible phenotype within the family and by the demonstration that the mutant channel has increased sensitivity to both caffeine and halothane.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The feasibility of using complete RYR1 transcripts from leukocytes for sequence analysis offers an efficient and noninvasive method for scanning RYR1 for novel mutations.
Polymorphisms and deduced amino acid substitutions in the coding sequence of the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene in individuals with malignant hyperthermia.
Twenty-one polymorphic sequence variants of the RYR1 gene, including 13 restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs), were identified by sequence analysis of human ryanodine receptor (RYR1) cDNAs from three individuals predisposed to malignant hyperthermia (MH). All RFLPs were detectable in PCR-amplified products, and their segregation was consistent with our initial finding of linkage to MH in the nine families previously informative for one or more intragenic markers (MacLennan et al., 1990, Nature 343:559-561). Four amino acid substitutions were identified in the study: Arg for Gly248, Cys for Arg470, Leu for Pro1785, and Cys for Gly2059. Of 45 families tested, a single family presented the Arg for Gly248 substitution where it segregated with malignant hyperthermia, making it a candidate mutation for predisposition to MH in man. The other three polymorphic substitutions failed to segregate with malignant hyperthermia in those families in which they occurred, implying that they represent polymorphisms with little or no effect on the function of the RYR1 gene.
Central core disease (CCD) is a dominantly inherited congenital myopathy allelic to malignant hyperthermia (MH) caused by mutations in the RYR1 gene on chromosome 19q13.1. Eleven individuals with RYR1 mutations are described. Four index cases showed features consistent with a congenital myopathy (hypotonia, delayed motor milestones, and skeletal abnormalities including congenital hip dislocation and scoliosis). All four cases and subsequently seven other family members were found to possess novel mutations in the RYR1 gene. The degree of disability varied from one clinically normal individual, to another who had never achieved independent ambulation (the only patient with a de novo mutation). Four cases showed a mild reduction in vital capacity, repeated nocturnal polysomnography showed hypoxaemia in one case. A variety of muscle biopsy features were found; central cores were absent in the youngest case, and the biopsy specimens from two others were more suggestive of mini-core myopathy. In all cases missense mutations in exons 101, 102, and 103 of the RYR1 gene on were found. Future laboratory diagnosis of suspected cases and family members will be less invasive and more accurate with DNA analysis. Clinicians, especially paediatricians and orthopaedic surgeons, should be aware of this disorder because of the potential risk of MH.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Histological anomalies associated with malignant hyperthermia (MH) have been scarcely reported. In some patients susceptible to MH (MHS), central cores have been identified and a genetic association has been proposed, but multiminicore lesions have not been systematically reported.&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To analyze the association between multiminicores and MHS in a large family with MH with an approach combining histology, in vitro contracture tests, and genetic analysis.&lt;h4&gt;Patients and methods&lt;/h4&gt;Twenty-nine members of an MH family (147 members) were investigated.&lt;h4&gt;Main outcome measures&lt;/h4&gt;Muscle biopsy specimens were analyzed histologically and with in vitro contracture tests. Genetic analyses were performed to determine the presence of mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;According to the gold standard in vitro contracture tests, 17 patients were diagnosed as having MHS and 10 as not being susceptible. Multiminicores were found in 16 of the 17 MHS patients and in a single nonsusceptible participant. A linkage between the MH trait and the RYR1 locus in chromosome 19 was demonstrated, whereas no already known mutations were found. Two missense heterozygous mutations (R2676W and T2787S) were identified from sequencing of the entire coding complementary DNA. Overall, we found a significant association between MHS and the presence of multiminicores (chi(2) = 26.5, P&lt;.001) on the one hand and the presence of new mutations in the RYR1 gene (chi(2) = 19.0, P&lt;.001) on the other hand. This remarkably high occurrence of multiminicores in an MHS family is uncommon, and genetic analyses indicate that the association between multiminicores and MHS is linked to a novel R2656W and T2787S substitution present on the same allele of the RYR1 gene.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;These results indicate that multiminicore lesions are observed in MHS patients with neither clinical signs related to multiminicore disease nor histological features of congenital myopathies. These multiminicore lesions may be secondary to mutations in the RYR1 gene. As a consequence, these patients must be distinguished from patients with multiminicore disease and from other MHS patients for whom multiminicores are not observed.
Multiminicore disease in a family susceptible to malignant hyperthermia: histology, in vitro contracture tests, and genetic characterization.
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) and malignant hyperthermia (MH) are autosomal-dominant genetically heterogeneous ion channelopathies. MH has been described in patients with HypoPP, suggesting a potential link between these disorders. However, a common genetic determinant has not been described. With the aim of corroborating this association, four candidate genes were screened in two independent HypoPP patients, one of whom was also diagnosed as MH-susceptible and the other as MH-normal by the in vitro contracture test (IVCT). An A&gt;G change at nucleotide 7025 was detected in the RYR1 gene in the HypoPP/MH-susceptible patient. Detection of the same mutation in three independent MH families suggested that 7025A&gt;G represents a novel MH-susceptibility allele and that MH and HypoPP occurred independently in the case presented. Conclusive evidence in support of the hypothesis that MH and HypoPP are allelic was therefore not obtained.
Mutation analysis of two patients with hypokalemic periodic paralysis and suspected malignant hyperthermia.
Correlations between genotype and pharmacological, histological, functional, and clinical phenotypes in malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Minicore myopathy (multi-minicore disease [MmD]) is a congenital myopathy characterized by multifocal areas with loss of oxidative activity on muscle biopsy. MmD is clinically heterogeneous and distinct phenotypes have been associated with recessive mutations in either the selenoprotein N (SEPN1) or the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, also implicated in central core disease and malignant hyperthermia. External ophthalmoplegia is an additional finding in a subset of patients with MmD.&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To clinically and genetically examine families with MmD and external ophthalmoplegia.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The authors investigated 11 affected individuals from 5 unrelated families. Clinical, histopathologic, and imaging studies were performed and RYR1 haplotyping and mutational analysis were carried out.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;All patients had multiple cores involving the entire fiber diameter on longitudinal sections. Weakness and wasting in the shoulder girdle, scoliosis, moderate respiratory impairment, and feeding difficulties were prominent. In contrast to SEPN1-related myopathies, soleus was more severely affected than gastrocnemius on muscle MRI. Haplotyping suggested linkage to the RYR1 locus in informative families and mutational screening revealed four novel RYR1 mutations in three unrelated families; in addition, functional haploinsufficiency was found in one allele of two recessive cases.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;These findings expand the phenotypic spectrum associated with mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene. Recessive mutations of domains commonly affected in malignant hyperthermia appear to be particularly prevalent in multi-minicore disease with external ophthalmoplegia and might suggest a different pathomechanism from that involved in central core disease.
Refinement of diagnostic assays for a probable causal mutation for porcine and human malignant hyperthermia.
The substitutions of T for C1843 in the porcine ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, which deletes a HinPI restriction endonuclease site and creates a HgiAI site, and of T for C1840 in human RYR1, which deletes a RsaI site, lead to Cys for Arg substitutions in the ryanodine receptors and are probable causal mutations for malignant hyperthermia (MH). To improve the restriction endonuclease assay of these sites, thereby providing an accurate, reliable diagnosis for MH, introns flanking the exon containing the mutation were sequenced, permitting identification and PCR amplification of a 659-bp porcine gene sequence that contains both constant and variant HgiAI sites and a 922-bp human gene sequence that contains both constant and variant RsaI sites. As a result, these PCR-amplified sequences contain constant internal controls for the reliable differentiation by restriction endonuclease digestion of normal, heterozygous, and MH genotypes.
Central core disease (CCD) is an autosomal-dominant congenital myopathy, with muscle weakness and malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility. We identified two of nine Brazilian CCD families carrying two mutations in the RYR1 gene. The heterozygous parents were clinically asymptomatic, and patients were mildly affected, differing from the few autosomal-recessive cases described previously. Recessive inheritance in CCD may therefore be more common than previously appreciated, which has important implications for genetic counseling and MH prevention in affected families.
A substitution of cysteine for arginine 614 in the ryanodine receptor is potentially causative of human malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a devastating, potentially lethal response to anesthetics that occurs in genetically predisposed individuals. The skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene has been linked to porcine and human MH. Furthermore, a Cys for Arg substitution tightly linked to, and potentially causative of, porcine MH has been identified in the ryanodine receptor. Analysis of 35 human families predisposed to malignant hyperthermia has revealed the presence, and cosegregation with phenotype, of the corresponding substitution in a single family. This substitution, by analogy to the findings in pig, may be causal for predisposition to MH in this family.
Increasing the number of diagnostic mutations in malignant hyperthermia.
Functional properties of RYR1 mutations identified in Swedish patients with malignant hyperthermia and central core disease.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;A diagnosis of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility by in vitro contraction testing can often only be performed at specialized laboratories far away from where patients live. Therefore, we have designed a protocol for genetic screening of the RYR1-cDNA and for functional testing of newly identified ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) gene variants in B lymphocytes isolated from peripheral blood samples drawn at local primary care centers.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;B lymphocytes were isolated for the extraction of RYR1-mRNA and genomic DNA and for establishment of lymphoblastoid B cell lines in 5 patients carrying yet unclassified mutations in the RYR1. The B lymphoblastoid cell lines were used to study resting cytoplasmic calcium concentration, the peak calcium transient induced by the sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca-ATPase inhibitor thapsigargin, and the dose-dependent calcium release induced by the ryanodine receptor agonist 4-chloro-m-cresol.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;It was possible to extract mRNA for cDNA synthesis and to create B lymphocyte clones from all samples. All B lymphoblastoid cell lines carrying RYR1 candidate mutations showed significantly increased resting cytoplasmic calcium levels as well as a shift to lower concentrations of 4-chloro-m-cresol inducing calcium release compared with controls.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Peripheral blood samples are stable regarding RNA and DNA extraction and establishment of lymphoblastoid B cell lines after transportation at ambient temperature over large distances by ordinary mail. Functional tests on B cells harboring the newly identified amino acid substitutions indicate that they alter intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis and are most likely causative of malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle characterized by disturbance of intracellular calcium homeostasis in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Mutations of the ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) gene account for most cases, with some studies claiming up to 86% of mutations in this locus. However, RYR1 gene is large and variants are common even in the normal population. We examined 54 families with MH susceptibility and 21 diagnosed with equivocal MH. Thirty-five were selected for an anesthetic reaction, whereas the remainder for hyperCKemia. In these, we studied all 106 exons of the RYR1 gene. When no mutation was found, we also screened: sodium channel voltage-gated, type IV alpha subunit (SCN4A), calcium channel voltage-dependent, L type, alpha 1S subunit (CACNA1S), and L-type voltage-gated calcium channel alpha 2/delta-subunit (CACNL2A). Twenty-nine different RYR1 mutations were discovered in 40 families. Three other MH genes were tested in negative cases. Fourteen RYR1 amino acid changes were novel, of which 12 were located outside the mutational 'hot spots'. In two families, the known mutation p.R3903Q was also observed in malignant hyperthermia-nonsusceptible (MHN) individuals. Unexpectedly, four changes were also found in the same family and two in another. Our study confirms that MH is genetically heterogeneous and that a consistent number of cases are not due to RYR1 mutations. The discordance between in vitro contracture test status and the presence of a proven causative RYR1 mutation suggests that the penetrance may vary due to as yet unknown factors.
Novel missense mutations and unexpected multiple changes of RYR1 gene in 75 malignant hyperthermia families.
Ryanodine receptors (RyRs) are located in the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum membrane and are responsible for the release of Ca(2+) from intracellular stores during excitation-contraction coupling in both cardiac and skeletal muscle. RyRs are the largest known ion channels (&gt; 2MDa) and exist as three mammalian isoforms (RyR 1-3), all of which are homotetrameric proteins that interact with and are regulated by phosphorylation, redox modifications, and a variety of small proteins and ions. Most RyR channel modulators interact with the large cytoplasmic domain whereas the carboxy-terminal portion of the protein forms the ion-conducting pore. Mutations in RyR2 are associated with human disorders such as catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia whereas mutations in RyR1 underlie diseases such as central core disease and malignant hyperthermia. This chapter examines the current concepts of the structure, function and regulation of RyRs and assesses the current state of understanding of their roles in associated disorders.
King-Denborough syndrome (KDS), first described in 1973, is a rare condition characterised by the triad of dysmorphic features, myopathy, and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS). Autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expressivity has been reported in several cases. Mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene have been implicated in a wide range of myopathies such as central core disease (CCD), the malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility trait and one isolated patient with KDS. Here we report clinical, pathologic and genetic features of four unrelated patients with KDS. Patients had a relatively uniform clinical presentation but muscle biopsy findings were highly variable. Heterozygous missense mutations in RYR1 were uncovered in three out of four families, of which one mutation was novel and two have previously been reported in MH. Further RyR1 protein expression studies performed in two families showed marked reduction of the RyR1 protein, indicating the presence of allelic RYR1 mutations not detectable on routine sequencing and potentially explaining marked intrafamilial variability. Our findings support the hypothesis that RYR1 mutations are associated with King-Denborough syndrome but that further genetic heterogeneity is likely.
&lt;h4&gt;Introduction&lt;/h4&gt;Ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) mutations have been associated with central core disease (CCD), multiminicore/minicore/multicore disease (MmD), and susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia (MH).&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Patients with muscle symptoms in adulthood, who had features compatible with CCD/MmD, underwent clinical, histological, and genetic (RYR1 and SEPN1 genes) evaluations. Published cases of CCD and MmD with adult onset were also reviewed.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Eight patients fulfilled the criteria for further analysis. Five RYR1 mutations, 4 of them unreported, were detected in 3 patients. Compound heterozygosity was proven in 1 case.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;To our knowledge, this is the only report of adult onset associated with recessive RYR1 mutations and central core/multiminicores on muscle biopsy. Although adult patients with CCD, MmD, and minimally symptomatic MH with abnormal muscle biopsy findings usually have a mild clinical course, differential diagnosis and carrier screening is crucial for prevention of potentially life-threatening reactions to general anesthesia.
Congenital myopathies describe a group of inherited muscle disorders with neonatal or infantile onset typically associated with muscle weakness, respiratory involvement and delayed motor milestones. We previously reported a novel congenital myopathy in an inbred Samaritan family. All patients displayed severe neonatal hypotonia and respiratory distress, and unlike other congenital myopathies, a constantly improving health status. As clinical and pathological data did not point to preferential candidate genes, we performed exome sequencing complemented by linkage analysis to identify the mutation causing the benign Samaritan congenital myopathy. We identified the homozygous p.Tyr1088Cys mutation in RYR1, encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor. This sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium channel is a key regulator of excitation-contraction coupling (ECC). Western blot and immunohistofluorescence revealed a significant decrease of the RYR1 protein level and an abnormal organization of skeletal muscle triad markers as caveolin-3, dysferlin and amphiphysin 2. RYR1 mutations are associated with different myopathies and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. The index patient had mild hyperthermia following anesthesia, indicating that the inbred Samaritan population might be a risk group for this disorder. Our results suggest an aberrant ECC as the primary cause of this disease, and broaden the clinical consequences of RYR1 defects.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Mutations in the ryanodine receptor type 1 gene (RYR1) that encodes the skeletal muscle-specific intracellular calcium (Ca(2+)) release channel are a cause of malignant hyperthermia (MH). In this study, we examined RYR1 mutations in a large number of North American MH-susceptible (MHS) subjects without prior genetic diagnosis.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;RYR1 was examined in 120 unrelated MHS subjects from the United States in a tiered manner. The α-1 subunit of the dihydropyridine receptor gene (CACNA1S) was screened for 4 variants in subjects in whom no abnormality was found in ≥ 100 exons of RYR1.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Ten known causative MH mutations were found in 26 subjects. Variants of uncertain significance in RYR1 were found in 36 subjects, 16 of which are novel. Novel variants in both RYR1 and CACNA1S were found in the 1 subject who died of MH. Two RYR1 variants were found in 4 subjects. Variants of uncertain significance were found outside and inside the hotspots of RYR1. Maximal contractures in the caffeine-halothane contracture test were greater in those who had a known MH mutation or variant of uncertain significance in RYR1 than in those who did not.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The identification of novel RYR1 variants and previously observed RYR1 variants of uncertain significance in independent MHS families is necessary for demonstrating the significance of these variants for MH susceptibility and supports the need for functional studies of these variants. Continued reporting of the clinical phenotypes of MH is necessary for interpretation of genetic findings, especially because the pathogenicity of most of these genetic variants associated with MHS remains to be elucidated.
Ryanodine receptor type 1 gene variants in the malignant hyperthermia-susceptible population of the United States.
Exome sequencing reveals novel rare variants in the ryanodine receptor and calcium channel genes in malignant hyperthermia families.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;About half of malignant hyperthermia (MH) cases are associated with skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) and calcium channel, voltage-dependent, L type, α1S subunit (CACNA1S) gene mutations, leaving many with an unknown cause. The authors chose to apply a sequencing approach to uncover causal variants in unknown cases. Sequencing the exome, the protein-coding region of the genome, has power at low sample sizes and identified the cause of over a dozen Mendelian disorders.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The authors considered four families with multiple MH cases lacking mutations in RYR1 and CACNA1S by Sanger sequencing of complementary DNA. Exome sequencing in two affecteds per family, chosen for maximum genetic distance, were compared. Variants were ranked by allele frequency, protein change, and measures of conservation among mammals to assess likelihood of causation. Finally, putative pathogenic mutations were genotyped in other family members to verify cosegregation with MH.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Exome sequencing revealed one rare RYR1 nonsynonymous variant in each of three families (Asp1056His, Val2627Met, Val4234Leu), and one CACNA1S variant (Thr1009Lys) in the fourth family. These were not seen in variant databases or in our control population sample of 5,379 exomes. Follow-up sequencing in other family members verified cosegregation of alleles with MH.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The authors found that using both exome sequencing and allele frequency data from large sequencing efforts may aid genetic diagnosis of MH. In a sample selected by the authors, this technique was more sensitive for variant detection in known genes than Sanger sequencing of complementary DNA, and allows for the possibility of novel gene discovery.
Divergent activity profiles of type 1 ryanodine receptor channels carrying malignant hyperthermia and central core disease mutations in the amino-terminal Region.
The type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1) is a Ca2+ release channel in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle and is mutated in several diseases, including malignant hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease (CCD). Most MH and CCD mutations cause accelerated Ca2+ release, resulting in abnormal Ca2+ homeostasis in skeletal muscle. However, how specific mutations affect the channel to produce different phenotypes is not well understood. In this study, we have investigated 11 mutations at 7 different positions in the amino (N)-terminal region of RyR1 (9 MH and 2 MH/CCD mutations) using a heterologous expression system in HEK293 cells. In live-cell Ca2+ imaging at room temperature (~25 °C), cells expressing mutant channels exhibited alterations in Ca2+ homeostasis, i.e., an enhanced sensitivity to caffeine, a depletion of Ca2+ in the ER and an increase in resting cytoplasmic Ca2+. RyR1 channel activity was quantitatively evaluated by [3H]ryanodine binding and three parameters (sensitivity to activating Ca2+, sensitivity to inactivating Ca2+ and attainable maximum activity, i.e., gain) were obtained by fitting analysis. The mutations increased the gain and the sensitivity to activating Ca2+ in a site-specific manner. The gain was consistently higher in both MH and MH/CCD mutations. Sensitivity to activating Ca2+ was markedly enhanced in MH/CCD mutations. The channel activity estimated from the three parameters provides a reasonable explanation to the pathological phenotype assessed by Ca2+ homeostasis. These properties were also observed at higher temperatures (~37 °C). Our data suggest that divergent activity profiles may cause varied disease phenotypes by specific mutations. This approach should be useful for diagnosis and treatment of diseases with mutations in RyR1.
Several ryanodine receptor type 1 gene mutations of p.Arg2508 are potential sources of malignant hyperthermia.
Aside from the in vitro contracture test, genetic screening for causative RYR1 mutations is the established procedure to diagnose susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia (MH). However, currently only 34 out of more than 300 known RYR1 mutations have been confirmed to be causative for MH by experimental studies addressing their functional impact on intracellular calcium homeostasis. The RYR1 mutation p.Arg4737Trp has been recently detected in a German MH family. To evaluate the effects of that mutation on intracellular calcium handling, the response after stimulation with the RYR1 agonist 4-chloro-m-cresol was investigated in immortalized B lymphocytes containing the p.Arg4737Trp mutation and compared to the response of wild type RYR1 from unaffected family members and unrelated controls. Intracellular resting calcium was slightly but significantly elevated in mutation positive cells. Calcium release following stimulation with 4-chloro-m-cresol was significantly increased in B lymphocytes carrying the p.Arg4737Trp mutation compared to mutation negative controls. Hence, the functional properties of the RYR1 mutation p.Arg4737Trp are consistent with susceptibility to MH. Together with previously published data, the mutation has now been reported in three independent MH positive families.
Functional characterization of the RYR1 mutation p.Arg4737Trp associated with susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia.
Genotype-phenotype correlations of malignant hyperthermia and central core disease mutations in the central region of the RYR1 channel.
Type 1 ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is a Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; release channel in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle and is mutated in some muscle diseases, including malignant hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease (CCD). Over 200 mutations associated with these diseases have been identified, and most mutations accelerate Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; -induced Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; release (CICR), resulting in abnormal Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; homeostasis in skeletal muscle. However, it remains largely unknown how specific mutations cause different phenotypes. In this study, we investigated the CICR activity of 14 mutations at 10 different positions in the central region of RYR1 (10 MH and four MH/CCD mutations) using a heterologous expression system in HEK293 cells. In live-cell Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; imaging, the mutant channels exhibited an enhanced sensitivity to caffeine, a reduced endoplasmic reticulum Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; content, and an increased resting cytoplasmic Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; level. The three parameters for CICR (Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; sensitivity for activation, Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; sensitivity for inactivation, and attainable maximum activity, i.e., gain) were obtained by [&lt;sup&gt;3&lt;/sup&gt; H]ryanodine binding and fitting analysis. The mutant channels showed increased gain and Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; sensitivity for activation in a site-specific manner. Genotype-phenotype correlations were explained well by the near-atomic structure of RYR1. Our data suggest that divergent CICR activity may cause various disease phenotypes by specific mutations.
We present the novel case report of a child with hypotonia and dysmorphic features who developed malignant hyperthermia (MH) intraoperatively. Neurology workup revealed the presence of a known causative ryanodine receptor (RYR1) mutation for MH, c.7522C&gt;T; p.R2508C. Furthermore, the neurology workup diagnosed the child with King-Denborough syndrome (KDS). This particular mutation has never been documented in a patient with KDS. Atypical presentation of MH is more likely in patients with RYR1-related myopathy. A high index of suspicion for MH in children with myopathy is important. The MH hotline was helpful in the management of this patient when it was called after the initial dose of dantrolene. A neurology consult was essential for the diagnosis of KDS and future care.
Ryanodine receptor gene point mutation and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
Mutation screening of the RYR1 gene in malignant hyperthermia: detection of a novel Tyr to Ser mutation in a pedigree with associated central cores.
The ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) has been shown to be mutated in a small number of malignant hyperthermia (MH) pedigrees. Missense mutations in this gene have also been identified in two families with central core disease (CCD), a rare myopathy closely associated with MH. In an effort to identify other RYR1 mutations responsible for MH and CCD, we used a SSCP approach to screen the RYR1 gene for mutations in a family exhibiting susceptibility to MH (MHS) where some of the MHS individuals display core regions in their muscle. Sequence analysis of a unique aberrant SSCP has allowed us to identify a point mutation cosegregating with MHS in the described family. The mutation changes a conserved tyrosine residue at position 522 to a serine residue. This mutation is positioned relatively close to five of the six MHS/CCD mutations known to date and provides further evidence that MHS/CCD mutations may cluster in the amino terminal region of the RYR1 protein.
Detection of a novel RYR1 mutation in four malignant hyperthermia pedigrees.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalational anaesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants. To date, six mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) have been identified in malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) and central core disease (CCD) cases. Using SSCP analysis, we have screened the RYR1 gene in affected individuals for novel MHS mutations and have identified a G to A transition mutation which results in the replacement of a conserved Gly at position 2433 with an Arg. The Gly2433Arg mutation was present in four of 104 unrelated MHS individuals investigated and was not detected in a normal population sample. This mutation is adjacent to the previously identified Arg2434His mutation reported in a CCD/MH family and indicates that there may be a second region in the RYR1 gene where MHS/CCD mutations cluster.
Single strand conformational polymorphism analysis was used to screen exons 43 and 44 in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene from 17 positively diagnosed members of families in which chromosome 19-linked malignant hyperthermia (MH) was segregating. A polymorphism in two unrelated individuals was found to result from the substitution of A for G7297, leading to the substitution of Arg for Gly2433. This mutation is adjacent to a mutation (Arg2434 to His) previously linked to MH and central core disease (Y. Zhang et al., Nature Genet. 1993, 5, 46-50). Subsequent screening showed the presence of the mutation in four of 106 MH families tested and its absence from about 1000 other chromosomes. The mutation was present in all six individuals in four families who had had an MH reaction, in two obligate carriers and in 10 individuals diagnosed as MH susceptible by the caffeine/halothane contracture test (CHCT). The mutation was present in an individual with a normal response to the CHCT and was absent in three individuals with a positive CHCT response. These discrepancies would be consistent with inaccuracies in the CHCT and/or with segregation of a second MH allele within two of the four affected families.
The substitution of Arg for Gly2433 in the human skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor is associated with malignant hyperthermia.
Detection of a novel common mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene in malignant hyperthermia: implications for diagnosis and heterogeneity studies.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalational anaesthetics. To date, the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) has been shown to be mutated in a small number of malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) cases. To determine if a common RYR1 mutation exists that might account for a significant number of MHS cases, we have investigated the RYR1 gene in unrelated patients for the presence of new mutations by the single-stranded conformation polymorphism method and have identified a novel Gly341Arg mutation which accounts for approximately 10% of Caucasian MHS cases. The implications of this common mutation in MHS diagnosis and heterogeneity studies are discussed.
Central core disease (CCD) is a morphologically distinct, autosomal dominant myopathy with variable clinical features. A close association with malignant hyperthermia (MH) has been identified. Since MH and CCD genes have been linked to the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, cDNA sequence analysis was used to search for a causal RYR1 mutation in a CCD individual. The only amino acid substitution found was an Arg2434His mutation, resulting from the substitution of A for G7301. This mutation was linked to CCD with a lod score of 4.8 at a recombinant fraction of 0.0 in 16 informative meioses in a 130 member family, suggesting a causal relationship to CCD.
Central core disease (CCD) of muscle is an inherited myopathy which is closely associated with malignant hyperthermia (MH) in humans. CCD has recently been shown to be tightly linked to the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) and mutations in this gene are known to be present in MH. Mutation screening of RYR1 has led to the identification of two previously undescribed mutations in different CCD pedigrees. One of these mutations was also detected in an unrelated MH pedigree whose members are asymptomatic of CCD. The data suggest a model to explain how a single mutation may result in two apparently distinct clinical phenotypes.
Mutations in the ryanodine receptor gene in central core disease and malignant hyperthermia.
The RYR1 gene encoding the Ca2+ release channel of human skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum has been cloned and exon/intron boundaries have been determined, together with a minimum of 30 bp of intron sequence flanking each splice junction. The gene contains 106 exons, of which two are alternatively spliced. The length of the gene, determined by the alignment of 16 genomic phage clones, a cosmid clone, and several long polymerase chain reaction products, is approximately 160 kb. Exons range from 15 to 813 bp, while introns range from 85 to about 16,000 bp. Analysis of the gene has confirmed published errors in the human RYR1 cDNA and confirmed the structure of two alternatively spliced exons. The numbering of the nucleotides comprising the RYR1 cDNA and the numbering of amino acids encoded by them were corrected to account for these earlier errors and omissions. Analysis of 2.4 kb of the 5' upstream sequence indicated the presence of a CCAAT box and several Sp1 binding sites between nucleotides -200 and -60 bp, flanking the proposed transcription start site at -130 bp. Several other potential transcription factor binding sites were identified throughout the 5' sequence. Knowledge of the structure of the RYR1 gene will provide an invaluable resource for the discovery of mutations in the gene that are causal of human malignant hyperthermia and central core disease.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal, often autosomal dominant, disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalational anesthetics. In this article, the authors describe a malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) kindred in which both parents of the proband are MHS and are first-degree cousins. Haplotype analysis in this kindred with chromosome 19 linked markers revealed that the proband and another sibling were homozygous for the affected RYR1 allele.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Eighteen members of this large pedigree were investigated, with a clinical examination for signs of a myopathy, a caffeine halothane contracture test, a histo-enzymologic study on the muscle biopsies, and linkage analysis on genomic DNA isolated from family blood samples. RYR1 cDNA was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and was cloned and sequenced, facilitating mutation detection.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Linkage analysis demonstrated linkage between RYR1-linked markers and MH susceptibility in this family. DNA sequencing identified a T to C transition at nucleotide position 103, resulting in the substitution of an arginine for cysteine 35, representing the most N-terminal mutation reported to date in the RYR1 gene. This mutation segregates fully with the MHS trait, generating a lod score of 4.65 in favor of linkage to MHS at a recombination frequency of 0.0.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The proband in this kindred is the first reported homozygote to have presented with an MH episode. The homozygotes in this pedigree do not have an overt myopathy. The sensitivity of muscle samples to caffeine clearly distinguished the two homozygotes from other heterozygous-susceptible individuals. No clear differentiation was observed with the halothane contracture results.
Defects in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene are associated with malignant hyperthermia (MH), an autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and one of the main causes of death resulting from anaesthesia. Susceptibility to MH (MHS) is determined by the level of tension generated in an in vitro muscle contracture test (IVCT) in response to caffeine and halothane. To date, mutation screening of the RYR1 gene in MH families has led to the identification of eight mutations. We describe here the identification of a novel mutation, Arg552Trp, in the RYR1 gene, which is clearly linked to the MHS phenotype in a large, well characterised Irish pedigree. Considering that the RYR1 protein functions as a tetramer, correlation of the IVCT with the affected and unaffected haplotypes was performed on the pedigree to investigate if the normal RYR1 allele in affected subjects contributes to the variation in the IVCT. The results show that the normal RYR1 allele is unlikely to play a role in IVCT variation.
Detection of a novel mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene in an Irish malignant hyperthermia pedigree: correlation of the IVCT response with the affected and unaffected haplotypes.
Detection of a novel mutation at amino acid position 614 in the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalation anaesthetics and depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents. To date, eight mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) have been identified in malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) and central core disease (CCD) cases. We have screened the RYR1 gene in affected individuals for novel MHS mutations by single stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and have identified a G to T transition mutation which results in the replacement of a conserved arginine (Arg) at position 614 with a leucine (Leu). The Arg614Leu mutation was present in three unrelated MHS individuals of 151 investigated. The mutation was not detected in 148 normal chromosomes and segregated precisely with MHS in family members from one of the probands where DNA was available for analysis. This mutation occurs at the same position as the previously identified Arg to Cys mutation reported in all cases of porcine MH and in approximately 5% of human MH. A comparison of the phenotypes of the Arg614Leu and Arg614Cys probands is presented.
Novel mutations at a CpG dinucleotide in the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia.
Identification of novel mutations in the ryanodine-receptor gene (RYR1) in malignant hyperthermia: genotype-phenotype correlation.
