Mutation screening of the RYR1 gene and identification of two novel mutations in Italian malignant hyperthermia families.
Point mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene are associated with malignant hyperthermia, an autosomal dominant disorder triggered in susceptible people (MHS) by volatile anaesthetics and depolarising skeletal muscle relaxants. To date, 17 missense point mutations have been identified in the human RYR1 gene by screening of the cDNA obtained from muscle biopsies. Here we report single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) screening for nine of the most frequent RYR1 mutations using genomic DNA isolated from MHS patients. In addition, the Argl63Cys mutation was analysed by restriction enzyme digestion. We analysed 57 unrelated patients and detected seven of the known RYR1 point mutations. Furthermore, we found a new mutation, Arg2454His, segregating with the MHS phenotype in a large pedigree and a novel amino acid substitution at position 2436 in another patient, indicating a 15.8% frequency of these mutations in Italian patients. A new polymorphic site in intron 16 that causes the substitution of a G at position -7 with a C residue was identified.
A mutation in the transmembrane/luminal domain of the ryanodine receptor is associated with abnormal Ca(2+) release channel function and severe central core disease.
Central core disease is a rare, nonprogressive myopathy that is characterized by hypotonia and proximal muscle weakness. In a large Mexican kindred with an unusually severe and highly penetrant form of the disorder, DNA sequencing identified an I4898T mutation in the C-terminal transmembrane/luminal region of the RyR1 protein that constitutes the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor. All previously reported RYR1 mutations are located either in the cytoplasmic N terminus or in a central cytoplasmic region of the 5,038-aa protein. The I4898T mutation was introduced into a rabbit RYR1 cDNA and expressed in HEK-293 cells. The response of the mutant RyR1 Ca2+ channel to the agonists halothane and caffeine in a Ca2+ photometry assay was completely abolished. Coexpression of normal and mutant RYR1 cDNAs in a 1:1 ratio, however, produced RyR1 channels with normal halothane and caffeine sensitivities, but maximal levels of Ca2+ release were reduced by 67%. [3H]Ryanodine binding indicated that the heterozygous channel is activated by Ca2+ concentrations 4-fold lower than normal. Single-cell analysis of cotransfected cells showed a significantly increased resting cytoplasmic Ca2+ level and a significantly reduced luminal Ca2+ level. These data are indicative of a leaky channel, possibly caused by a reduction in the Ca2+ concentration required for channel activation. Comparison with two other coexpressed mutant/normal channels suggests that the I4898T mutation produces one of the most abnormal RyR1 channels yet investigated, and this level of abnormality is reflected in the severe and penetrant phenotype of affected central core disease individuals.
Establishment of transgenic cell line CHL-3A4 and its metabolic activation.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To establish a model cell line CHL-3A4 to study metabolic pathways for some genotoxic chemicals.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Complimentary DNA (cDNA) of cloned cytochrome P450-3A4 gene in human liver tissue was transferred to Bluescript M13 vector with reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and DNA recombinant techniques. Restriction endonuclease map analysis and sequencing of partial cloned fragment proved that CYP3A4 cDNA was cloned into Bluescript M13 vector. Then, recombinant expression plasmid pREP9-3A4 was constructed in eukaryotic cell and transfected into Chinese hamster CHL cells.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;It was proved that a CHL-3A4 transgenic cell line was established, which could lead metabolic activation for aflatoxin B1 (AFB1), sterigmatocystin (STC) and cyclophosphamide (CPA).&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;The CHL-3A4 cell line established did express human cytochrome P450 3A4 and could lead metabolic activation for three genotoxic chemicals AFB1, STC and CPA.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) in man is an autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle Ca(2+)-regulation. During anesthesia in predisposed individuals, it is triggered by volatile anesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants. In &gt;50% of the families, MH susceptibility is linked to the gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1), the calcium release channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, on chromosome 19q12-13.2. To date, 21 RYR1 mutations have been identified in a number of pedigrees. Four of them are also associated with central core disease (CCD), a congenital myopathy. Screening for these 21 mutations in 105 MH families including 10 CCD families phenotyped by the in vitro contracture test (IVCT) according to the European protocol revealed the following approximate distribution: 9% Arg-614-Cys, 1% Arg-614-Leu, 1% Arg-2163-Cys, 1% Val-2168-Met, 3% Thr-2206-Met and 7% Gly-2434-Arg. In one CCD family, the disease was caused by a recently reported MH mutation, Arg-2454-His. Two novel mutations, Thr-2206-Arg and Arg-2454-Cys were detected, each in a single pedigree. In the 109 individuals of the 25 families with RYR1 mutations cosegregation between genetic result and IVCT was almost perfect, only three genotypes were discordant with the IVCT phenotypes, suggesting a true sensitivity of 98.5% and a specificity of minimally 81.8% for this test. Screening of the transmembraneous region of RYR1 did not yield a new mutation confirming the cytosolic portion of the protein to be of main functional importance for disease pathogenesis.
Screening of the ryanodine receptor gene in 105 malignant hyperthermia families: novel mutations and concordance with the in vitro contracture test.
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)- and Rad3-related protein (ATR) is a phosphatidylinositol-kinase (PIK)-related kinase that has been implicated in the response of human cells to multiple forms of DNA damage and may play a role in the DNA replication checkpoint. The purification of an ATR complex allowed identification of chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 4 (CHD4) as an ATR-associated protein by tandem mass spectrometric sequencing. CHD4 (also called Mi-2beta) is a component of a histone-deacetylase-2 (HDAC2)-containing complex, the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylating (NRD) complex. Endogenous ATR, CHD4, and HDAC2 are shown to coimmunoprecipitate, and ATR and HDAC2 coelute through two biochemical purification steps. Other members of the NRD complex, HDAC1, MTA1, and MTA2, are also detectable in ATR immunoprecipitates. ATR's association with CHD4 and HDAC2 suggests that there may be a linkage between ATR's role in mediating checkpoints induced by DNA damage and chromatin modulation via remodeling and deacetylation.
Molecular association between ATR and two components of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylating complex, HDAC2 and CHD4.
Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain.
We have conducted a sequencing project of human cDNAs which encode large proteins in brain. For selection of cDNA clones to be sequenced in this project, cDNA clones have been experimentally examined by in vitro transcription/translation prior to sequencing. In this study, we tested an alternative approach for picking up cDNA clones having a high probability of carrying protein coding region. This approach exploited 5'-end single-pass sequence data and the GeneMark program for assessing protein-coding potential, and allowed us to select 74 clones out of 14,804 redundant cDNA clones. The complete sequence data of these 74 clones revealed that 45% of them encoded proteins consisting of more than 500 amino acid residues while all the clones thus selected carried possible protein coding sequences as expected. The results indicated that the GeneMark analysis of 5'-end sequences of cDNAs offered us a simple and effective means to select cDNA clones with protein-coding potential although the sizes of the encoded proteins could not be predicted.
ATR is a caffeine-sensitive, DNA-activated protein kinase with a substrate specificity distinct from DNA-PK.
ATR is a large, &gt; 300 kDa protein containing a carboxy-terminus kinase domain related to PI-3 kinase, and is homologous to the ATM gene product in human cells and the rad3/MEC1 proteins in yeast. These proteins, together with the DNA-PK, are part of a new family of PI-3 kinase related proteins. All members of this family play important roles in checkpoints which operate to permit cell survival following many forms of DNA damage. We have expressed ATR protein in HEK293 cells and purified the protein to near-homogeneity. We show that pure ATR is a protein kinase which is activated by circular single-stranded, double-stranded or linear DNA. Thus ATR is a new member of a sub-family of PIK related kinases, founded by the DNA-PK, which are activated in the presence of DNA. Unlike DNA-PK, ATR does not appear to require Ku proteins for its activation by DNA. We show directly that, like ATM and DNA-PK, ATR phosphorylates the genome surveillance protein p53 on serine 15, a site which is up-regulated in response to DNA damage. In addition, we find that ATR has a substrate specificity similar to, but unique from, the DNA-PK in vitro, suggesting that these proteins have overlapping but distinct functions in vivo. Finally, we find that the kinase activity of ATR in the presence and absence of DNA is suppressed by caffeine, a compound which is known to induce loss of checkpoint control. Our results are consistent with the notion that ATR plays a role in monitoring DNA structure and phosphorylation of proteins involved in the DNA damage response pathways.
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) phosphorylates p53 protein in response to ionizing radiation, but the complex phenotype of AT cells suggests that it must have other cellular substrates as well. To identify substrates for ATM and the related kinases ATR and DNA-PK, we optimized in vitro kinase assays and developed a rapid peptide screening method to determine general phosphorylation consensus sequences. ATM and ATR require Mn(2+), but not DNA ends or Ku proteins, for optimal in vitro activity while DNA-PKCs requires Mg(2+), DNA ends, and Ku proteins. From p53 peptide mutagenesis analysis, we found that the sequence S/TQ is a minimal essential requirement for all three kinases. In addition, hydrophobic amino acids and negatively charged amino acids immediately NH(2)-terminal to serine or threonine are positive determinants and positively charged amino acids in the region are negative determinants for substrate phosphorylation. We determined a general phosphorylation consensus sequence for ATM and identified putative in vitro targets by using glutathione S-transferase peptides as substrates. Putative ATM in vitro targets include p95/nibrin, Mre11, Brca1, Rad17, PTS, WRN, and ATM (S440) itself. Brca2, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and DNA-5B peptides were phosphorylated specifically by ATR, and DNA Ligase IV is a specific in vitro substrate of DNA-PK.
Substrate specificities and identification of putative substrates of ATM kinase family members.
Novel mutation in the RYR1 gene (R2454C) in a patient with malignant hyperthermia.
CYP3A4 allelic variants with amino acid substitutions in exons 7 and 12: evidence for an allelic variant with altered catalytic activity.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To determine the existence of mutant and variant CgammaP3A4 alleles in three racial groups and to assess functions of the variant alleles by complementary deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA) expression.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;A bacterial artificial chromosome that contains the complete CgammaP3A4 gene was isolated and the exons and surrounding introns were directly sequenced to develop primers to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplify and sequence the gene from lymphocyte DNA. DNA samples from Chinese, black, and white subjects were screened. Mutating the affected amino acid in the wild-type cDNA and expressing the variant enzyme with use of the baculovirus system was used to functionally evaluate the variant allele having a missense mutation.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;To investigate the existence of mutant and variant CgammaP3A4 alleles in humans, all 13 exons and the 5'-flanking region of the human CgammaP3A4 gene in three racial groups were sequenced and four alleles were identified. An A--&gt;G point mutation in the 5'-flanking region of the human CgammaP3A4 gene, designated CgammaP3A4*1B, was found in the three different racial groups. The frequency of this allele in a white population was 4.2%, whereas it was 66.7% in black subjects. The CgammaP3A4*1B allele was not found in Chinese subjects. A second variant allele, designated CgammaP3A4*2, having a Ser222Pro change, was found at a frequency of 2.7% in the white population and was absent in the black subjects and Chinese subjects analyzed. Baculovirus-directed cDNA expression revealed that the CYP3A4*2 P450 had a lower intrinsic clearance for the CYP3A4 substrate nifedipine compared with the wild-type enzyme but was not significantly different from the wild-type enzyme for testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation. Another rare allele, designated CgammaP3A4*3, was found in a single Chinese subject who had a Met445Thr change in the conserved heme-binding region of the P450.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;These are the first examples of potential function polymorphisms resulting from missense mutations in the CgammaP3A4 gene. The CgammaP3A4*2 allele was found to encode a P450 with substrate-dependent altered kinetics compared with the wild-type P450.
Biosynthesis of all-trans-retinoic acid from all-trans-retinol: catalysis of all-trans-retinol oxidation by human P-450 cytochromes.
Oxidative conversion of all-trans-retinol (t-ROH) to all-trans-retinal (t-RAL) is recognized as the rate-limiting step for biosynthesis of all-trans-retinoic acid from t-ROH in mammalian hepatic tissues. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of human cytochrome P-450 (CYP)-dependent monooxygenation in the conversion of t-ROH to t-RAL. Adult human liver microsomes (HLMS) were incubated with t-ROH, and retinoids generated were identified and quantified by liquid chromatography-mass spectroscopy, HPLC, and other methods. HLMS-catalyzed generation of t-RAL from t-ROH was primarily NADPH-dependent and was strongly inhibited by carbon monoxide. Rates of reactions increased linearly with time and concentrations of HLMS, and exhibited classical substrate saturation. These observations strongly indicated that the reaction proceeded via CYP-catalyzed monooxygenation. On the basis of responses to selective chemical inhibitors, isoforms from CYP family 1 and the CYP3A subfamily appeared to be very active. Members of the CYP2C subfamily and CYP2D6 exhibited lesser activities and CYP2A6, CYP2B6, and CYP2E1 were virtually inactive. cDNA-expressed human CYP enzymes (CYP SUPERSOMES) also were used to assess the capacity of individual CYP enzymes to catalyze the reaction. Based on responses to selective chemical inhibitors, specific activities, and levels present in adult human hepatic tissues, CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 strongly appeared to be the major CYP enzymes catalyzing hepatic oxidative conversion of t-ROH to t-RAL in the adult human liver. CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 SUPERSOMES both exhibited exceptionally high activities, and in extrahepatic tissues, these isoforms could play important roles in biosynthesis of all-trans-retinoic acid from t-ROH.
&lt;h4&gt;Aims&lt;/h4&gt;Albendazole (ABZ; methyl 5-propylthio-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl carbamate) is a broad spectrum anthelmintic whose activity resides both in the parent compound and its sulphoxide metabolite (ABS). There are numerous reports of ABZ metabolism in animals but relatively few in humans. We have investigated the sulphoxidation of ABZ in human liver microsomes and recombinant systems.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The specific enzymes involved in the sulphoxidation of ABZ were determined by a combination of approaches; inhibition with an antiserum directed against cytochrome P450 reductase, the effect of selective chemical inhibitors on ABZ sulphoxidation in human liver microsomes, the capability of expressed CYP and FMO to mediate the formation of ABS, regression analysis of the rate of metabolism of ABZ to ABS in human liver microsomes against selective P450 substrates and regression analysis of the rate of ABS sulphoxidation against CYP expression measured by Western blotting.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Comparison of Vmax values obtained following heat inactivation (3min at 45 degrees C) of flavin monoxygenases (FMO), chemical inhibition of FMO with methimazole and addition of an antiserum directed against cytochrome P450 reductase indicate that FMO and CYP contribute approximately 30% and 70%, respectively, to ABS production in vitro. Comparison of CLint values suggests CYP is a major contributor in vivo. A significant reduction in ABZ sulphoxidation (n = 3) was seen with ketoconazole (CYP3 A4; 32-37%), ritonavir (CYP3 A4: 34-42%), methimazole (FMO: 28-49%) and thioacetamide (FMO; 32-35%). Additive inhibition with ketoconazole and methimazole was 69 +/-8% (n = 3). ABS production in heat - treated microsomes (3 min at 45 degrees C) correlated significantly with testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (CYP3A4; P &lt; 0.05) and band intensities on Western blots probed with an antibody selective for 3A4 (P &lt; 0.05). Recombinant human CYP3 A4, CYP1A2 and FMO3 produced ABS in greater quantities than control microsomes, with those expressing CYP3A4 producing threefold more ABS than those expressing CYP1A2. Kinetic studies showed the Km values obtained with both CYP3A4 and FMO3 were similar.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;We conclude that the production of ABS in human liver is mediated via both FMO and CYP, principally CYP3A4, with the CYP component being the major contributor.
Relative contribution of cytochromes P-450 and flavin-containing monooxygenases to the metabolism of albendazole by human liver microsomes.
Malignant hyperthermia in infancy and identification of novel RYR1 mutation.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) has been reported as non-existent in children less than 1 yr old, although several unconfirmed reports have been published. A case report of MH in a 6-month-old child is presented, with confirmation of MH susceptibility by in vitro contracture testing of quadriceps muscle at 13 yr old. Genetic analysis revealed a novel RYR1 mutation that substitutes arginine 2452 for tryptophan in a region of the calcium channel mutated in several other MH pedigrees.
PKA phosphorylation dissociates FKBP12.6 from the calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor): defective regulation in failing hearts.
The ryanodine receptor (RyR)/calcium release channel on the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) is the major source of calcium (Ca2+) required for cardiac muscle excitation-contraction (EC) coupling. The channel is a tetramer comprised of four type 2 RyR polypeptides (RyR2) and four FK506 binding proteins (FKBP12.6). We show that protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation of RyR2 dissociates FKBP12.6 and regulates the channel open probability (Po). Using cosedimentation and coimmunoprecipitation we have defined a macromolecular complex comprised of RyR2, FKBP12.6, PKA, the protein phosphatases PP1 and PP2A, and an anchoring protein, mAKAP. In failing human hearts, RyR2 is PKA hyperphosphorylated, resulting in defective channel function due to increased sensitivity to Ca2+-induced activation.
Chk1, an evolutionarily conserved protein kinase, has been implicated in cell cycle checkpoint control in lower eukaryotes. By gene disruption, we show that CHK1 deficiency results in a severe proliferation defect and death in embryonic stem (ES) cells, and peri-implantation embryonic lethality in mice. Through analysis of a conditional CHK1-deficient cell line, we demonstrate that ES cells lacking Chk1 have a defective G(2)/M DNA damage checkpoint in response to gamma-irradiation (IR). CHK1 heterozygosity modestly enhances the tumorigenesis phenotype of WNT-1 transgenic mice. We show that in human cells, Chk1 is phosphorylated on serine 345 (S345) in response to UV, IR, and hydroxyurea (HU). Overexpression of wild-type Atr enhances, whereas overexpression of the kinase-defective mutant Atr inhibits S345 phosphorylation of Chk1 induced by UV treatment. Taken together, these data indicate that Chk1 plays an essential role in the mammalian DNA damage checkpoint, embryonic development, and tumor suppression, and that Atr regulates Chk1.
Chk1 is an essential kinase that is regulated by Atr and required for the G(2)/M DNA damage checkpoint.
A novel ryanodine receptor mutation and genotype-phenotype correlation in a large malignant hyperthermia New Zealand Maori pedigree.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder that predisposes to a sometimes fatal hypermetabolic reaction to halogenated anaesthetics. MH is considered to originate from abnormal regulation of skeletal muscle Ca(2+) release. Current diagnosis of MH susceptibility (MHS) relies on in vitro contracture testing (IVCT) of skeletal muscle. The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) encoding the major Ca(2+) release channel in the skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum has been shown to be mutated in a number of MH pedigrees. The large Maori pedigree reported here is the largest MHS pedigree investigated to date and comprises five probands who experienced clinical episodes of MH and 130 members diagnosed by the IVCT. Sequencing of the 15 117 bp RYR1 cDNA in a MHS individual from this pedigree identified a novel C14477T transition that results in a Thr4826 to Ile substitution in the C-terminal region/transmembrane loop of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor. This is the first mutation in the RyR1 C-terminal region associated solely with MHS. Although linkage analysis showed strong linkage (max LOD, 11.103 at theta = 0.133) between the mutation and MHS in the pedigree using the standardized European IVCT phenotyping protocol, 22 MHS recombinants were observed. The relationship between the IVCT response and genotype was explored and showed that as IVCT diagnostic cut-off points were made increasingly stringent, the number of MHS discordants decreased with complete concordance between the presence or absence of the C14477T mutation and MHS and MH normal phenotypes, respectively, using a cut-off of 1.2 g tension at 2.0 mM caffeine and 1.8 g tension at 2.0% halothane. Many MHS pedigrees investigated have been excluded from linkage to the RYR1 gene on the basis of a small number of recombinants; however, the linkage analysis reported here suggests that other recombinant families excluded from linkage to the RYR1 gene may actually demonstrate linkage as the number of members tested within the pedigrees increases. The high number of discordants observed using the standardized diagnostic cut-off points is likely to reflect the presence of a second MHS susceptibility locus in the pedigree.
Cytochrome P450 (P450)-dependent metabolism of all-trans-retinoic acid (atRA) is important for the expression of its biological activity. Because the human P450s involved in the formation of the principal atRA metabolites have been only partially identified, the purpose of this study was to identify the human P450s involved in atRA metabolism. The use of phenotyped human liver microsomes (n = 16) allowed the identification of the following P450s: 2B6, 2C8, 3A4/5, and 2A6 were involved in the formation of 4-OH-RA and 4-oxo-RA; 2B6, 2C8, and 2A6 correlated with the formation of 18-OH-RA; and 2A6, 2B6, and 3A4/5 activities correlated with 5, 6-epoxy-RA formation (30-min incubation, 10 microM atRA, HPLC separation, UV detection 340 nm). The use of 15 cDNA-expressed human P450s from lymphoblast microsomes, showed the formation of 4-OH-RA by CYP3A7 &gt; CYP3A5 &gt; CYP2C18 &gt; CYP2C8 &gt; CYP3A4 &gt; CYP2C9, whereas the 18-OH-RA formation involved CYPs 4A11 &gt; 3A7 &gt; 1A1 &gt; 2C9 &gt; 2C8 &gt; 3A5 &gt; 3A4 &gt;2C18. Kinetic studies identified 3A7 as the most active P450 in the formation of three of the metabolites: for 4-OH-retinoic acid, 3A7 showed a V(max)/K(m) of 127.7, followed by 3A5 (V(max)/K(m) = 25.6), 2C8 (V(max)/K(m) = 24.5), 2C18 (V(max)/K(m) = 15.8), 3A4 (V(max)/K(m) = 5.7), 1A1 (V(max)/K(m) = 5.0), and 4A11 (V(max)/K(m) = 1.9); for 4-oxo-RA, 3A7 showed a V(max)/K(m) of 13.4, followed by a 10-fold lower activity for both 2C18 and 4A11 (V(max)/K(m) = 1.2); and for 18-OH-RA, 3A7 showed a V(max)/K(m) of 10.5 compared with a V(max)/K(m) of 2.1 for 4A11 and 2.0 for 2C8. 5,6-Epoxy-RA was only detected at high substrate concentrations in this system (&gt;10 microM), and P450s 2C8, 2C9, and 1A1 were the most active in its formation. The use of embryonic kidney cells (293) stably transfected with human P450 cDNA confirmed the major involvement of P450s 3A7, 1A1, and 2C8 in the oxidation of atRA, and to a lesser extent, 1A2, 2C9, and 3A4. In conclusion, several human P450s involved in atRA metabolism have been identified, the expression of which was shown to direct atRA metabolism toward the formation of specific metabolites. The role of these human P450s in the biological and anticancer effects of atRA remains to be elucidated.
Identification of human cytochrome P450s involved in the formation of all-trans-retinoic acid principal metabolites.
A novel ryanodine receptor gene mutation causing both cores and rods in congenital myopathy.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Central core disease (CCD) and nemaline rod myopathy are generally considered two genetically and histologically distinct disorders. CCD is defined by the presence of well-demarcated round cores within most myofibers. Nemaline rod myopathy is distinguished by the presence of characteristic nemaline bodies within myofibers. The simultaneous occurrence of both cores and rods in the same muscle biopsy has been described, but no gene mutations have been reported yet for this condition.&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To describe a family containing 16 affected individuals in six generations with an autosomal dominant congenital myopathy that shows clinical and histologic features of both CCD and nemaline myopathy, and to determine the genetic etiology and protein composition of the cores/rods in this family.&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;The results of linkage analyses excluded involvement of the two autosomal dominant nemaline myopathy loci on chromosome 1, but were consistent with a localization of the disease gene at the CCD locus on chromosome 19q13.1 (ryanodine receptor). SSCP analysis and DNA sequencing identified a novel Thr4637Ala mutation in the transmembrane region of the ryanodine receptor protein. Immunofluorescence studies of patient muscle biopsies showed the central cores to stain for ryanodine receptor.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;These data suggest that the occurrence of nemaline bodies can be a secondary feature of CCD, and that genetic studies on previously reported core/rod families should be targeted to the ryanodine receptor locus. The results of the immunofluorescence studies suggest that the cores contain excess abnormal ryanodine receptor protein.
Functional interactions between BRCA1 and the checkpoint kinase ATR during genotoxic stress.
The BRCA1 gene encodes a tumor suppressor that is mutated in 50% of familial breast cancers. The BRCA1 protein has been implicated in the DNA damage response, as DNA damage induces the phosphorylation of BRCA1 and causes its recruitment into nuclear foci that contain DNA repair proteins. The ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) gene product controls overall BRCA1 phosphorylation in response to gamma-irradiation (IR). In this study, we show that BRCA1 phosphorylation is only partially ATM dependent in response to IR and ATM independent in response to treatment with UV light, or the DNA replication inhibitors hydroxyurea (HU) and aphidicolin (APH). We provide evidence that the kinase responsible for this phosphorylation is the ATM-related kinase, ATR. ATR phosphorylates BRCA1 on six Ser/Thr residues, including Ser 1423, in vitro. Increased expression of ATR enhanced the phosphorylation of BRCA1 on Ser 1423 following cellular exposure to HU or UV light, whereas doxycycline-induced expression of a kinase-inactive ATR mutant protein inhibited HU- or UV light-induced Ser 1423 phosphorylation in GM847 fibroblasts, and partially suppressed the phosphorylation of this site in response to IR. Thus, ATR, like ATM, controls BRCA1 phosphorylation in vivo. Although ATR isolated from DNA-damaged cells does not show enhanced kinase activity in vitro, we found that ATR responds to DNA damage and replication blocks by forming distinct nuclear foci at the sites of stalled replication forks. Furthermore, ATR nuclear foci overlap with the nuclear foci formed by BRCA1. The dramatic relocalization of ATR in response to DNA damage points to a possible mechanism for its ability to enhance the phosphorylation of substrates in response to DNA damage. Together, these results demonstrate that ATR and BRCA1 are components of the same genotoxic stress-responsive pathway, and that ATR directly phosphorylates BRCA1 in response to damaged DNA or stalled DNA replication.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia is an autosomal-dominant, inherited disease with a relatively early onset and a mortality rate of approximately 30% by the age of 30 years. Phenotypically, it is characterized by salvoes of bidirectional and polymorphic ventricular tachycardias in response to vigorous exercise, with no structural evidence of myocardial disease. We previously mapped the causative gene to chromosome 1q42-q43. In the present study, we demonstrate that patients with familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia have missense mutations in the cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor type 2 [RyR2]).&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;In 3 large families studied, 3 different RyR2 mutations (P2328S, Q4201R, V4653F) were detected and shown to fully cosegregate with the characteristic arrhythmic phenotype. These mutations were absent in the nonaffected family members and in 100 healthy controls. In addition to identifying 3 causative mutations, we identified a number of single nucleotide polymorphisms that span the genomic structure of RyR2 and will be useful for candidate-based association studies for other arrhythmic disorders.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Our data illustrate that mutations of the RyR2 gene cause at least one variety of inherited polymorphic tachycardia. These findings define a new entity of disorders of myocardial calcium signaling.
Mutations of the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) gene in familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
1,8-Cineole, the monoterpene cyclic ether known as eucalyptol, is one of the components in essential oils from Eucalyptus polybractea. We investigated the metabolism of 1,8-cineole by liver microsomes of rats and humans and by recombinant cytochrome P450 (P450 or CYP) enzymes in insect cells in which human P450 and NADPH-P450 reductase cDNAs had been introduced. 1,8-Cineole was found to be oxidized at high rates to 2-exo-hydroxy-1,8-cineole by rat and human liver microsomal P450 enzymes. In rats, pregenolone-16alpha-carbonitrile (PCN) and phenobarbital induced the 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities by liver microsomes. Several lines of evidence suggested that CYP3A4 is a major enzyme involved in the oxidation of 1,8-cineole by human liver microsomes: (1), 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities by liver microsomes were inhibited very significantly by ketoconazole, a CYP3A inhibitor, and anti-CYP3A4 immunoglobulin G; (2), there was a good correlation between CYP3A4 contents and 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities in liver microsomes of eighteen human samples; and (3), of various recombinant human P450 enzymes examined, CYP3A4 had the highest activities for 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation; the rate catalyzed by CYP3A5 was about one-fourth of that catalyzed by CYP3A4. Kinetic analysis showed that K(m) and V(max) values for the oxidation of 1,8-cineole by liver microsomes of human sample HL-104 and rats treated with PCN were 50 microM and 91 nmol/min/nmol P450 and 20 microM and 12 nmol/min/nmol P450, respectively. The rates observed using human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP3A4 were very high among other CYP3A4 substrates reported so far. These results suggest that 1,8-cineole, a monoterpenoid present in nature, is one of the effective substrates for CYP3A enzymes in rat and human liver microsomes.
Oxidation of 1,8-cineole, the monoterpene cyclic ether originated from eucalyptus polybractea, by cytochrome P450 3A enzymes in rat and human liver microsomes.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia type 2 (ARVD2, OMIM 600996) is an autosomal dominant cardiomyopathy, characterized by partial degeneration of the myocardium of the right ventricle, electrical instability and sudden death. The disease locus was mapped to chromosome 1q42--q43. We report here on the physical mapping of the critical ARVD2 region, exclusion of two candidate genes (actinin 2 and nidogen), elucidation of the genomic structure of the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (RYR2) and identification of RYR2 mutations in four independent families. In myocardial cells, the RyR2 protein, activated by Ca(2+), induces the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol. RyR2 is the cardiac counterpart of RyR1, the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor, involved in malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility and in central core disease (CCD). The RyR2 mutations detected in the present study occurred in two highly conserved regions, strictly corresponding to those where mutations causing MH or CCD are clustered in the RYR1 gene. The detection of RyR2 mutations causing ARVD2, reported in this paper, opens the way to pre-symptomatic detection of carriers of the disease in childhood, thus enabling early monitoring and treatment.
Identification of mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene in families affected with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy type 2 (ARVD2).
Human cytochrome P450 3A4 is a major P450 enzyme in the liver and gastrointestinal tract. It plays important roles in the metabolism of a wide variety of drugs, some endogenous steroids, and harmful environmental contaminants. CYP3A4 exhibits a remarkable interindividual activity variation as high as 20-fold. To investigate whether the interindividual variation in CYP3A4 levels can be partly explained by genetic polymorphism, we analyzed DNA samples from 102 Chinese subjects by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis for novel point mutation in the CYP3A4 coding sequence and promoter region. Using PCR and directed sequencing method to establish the complete intron sequence of CYP3A4 from leukocytes, the complete genomic sequence from exon 1 through 13 of CYP3A4 was determined and published in the GenBank database (accession no. AF209389). CYP3A4-specific primers were designed accordingly. After PCR-single-strand conformation polymorphism and restriction fragment length polymorphism screening, we found three novel mutations; two are point mutations and one is insertion. The first variant allele (CYP3A4*4), an Ile118Val change, was found in 3 of 102 Chinese subjects. The next allele (CYP3A4*5), which causes a Pro218Arg amino acid change, was found in 2 of 102 subjects. We found an insertion in A(17776), designated as CYP3A4*6, which causes frame shift and an early stop codon in exon 9, in one heterozygous subject. We also investigated the CYP3A4 activity in these mutant subjects by measuring the morning spot urinary 6beta-hydroxycortisol to free cortisol ratio with the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method. When compared with healthy Chinese population data, the 6beta-hydroxycortisol to free cortisol ratio data suggested that these alleles (CYP3A4*4, CYP3A4*5, and CYP3A4*6) may decrease the CYP3A4 activity. Incidences of these mutations in Chinese subjects are rare. The prevalence of these point mutations in other ethnic groups and its effect on the metabolic activity of CYP3A4 remain to be further evaluated.
Novel mutations of CYP3A4 in Chinese.
Organization of the CYP1A cluster on human chromosome 15: implications for gene regulation.
The sequence and organization of the CYP1A cluster on human chromosome 15 was determined. A human genomic clone from a BAC library, containing both CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes, was isolated and sequenced. The results of Southern blot analysis using human genomic DNA were compatible with the structure of the BAC clone. The CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes are separated by a 23 kb segment that contains no other open reading frames. The CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes are in opposite orientation, revealing that the 5' flanking region is in common between the two genes. Analysis of the sequence obtained revealed the presence of xenobiotic response elements (XREs) previously reported for CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 and several additional consensus sequences for putative XREs. The presence of all the XREs upstream of both genes suggest that some of the regulatory elements known to control CYP1A1 gene expression, could also control CYP1A2 gene expression.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia is a genetic arrhythmogenic disorder characterized by stress-induced, bidirectional ventricular tachycardia that may degenerate into cardiac arrest and cause sudden death. The electrocardiographic pattern of this ventricular tachycardia closely resembles the arrhythmias associated with calcium overload and the delayed afterdepolarizations observed during digitalis toxicity. We speculated that a genetically determined abnormality of intracellular calcium handling might be the substrate of the disease; therefore, we considered the human cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (hRyR2) a likely candidate for this genetically transmitted arrhythmic disorder.&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;Twelve patients presenting with typical catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in the absence of structural heart abnormalities were identified. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes, and single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis was performed on polymerase chain reaction-amplified exons of the hRyR2 gene. Four single nucleotide substitutions leading to missense mutations were identified in 4 probands affected by the disease. Genetic analysis of the asymptomatic parents revealed that 3 probands carried de novo mutations. In 1 case, the identical twin of the proband died suddenly after having suffered syncopal episodes. The fourth mutation was identified in the proband, in 4 clinically affected family members, and in none of 3 nonaffected family members in a kindred with 2 sudden deaths that occurred at 16 and 14 years, respectively, in the sisters of the proband.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;We demonstrated that, in agreement with our hypothesis, hRyR2 is a gene responsible for catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
Mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (hRyR2) underlie catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
Identification of a novel mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) in patients with malignant hyperthermia.
Genomic organization of the human CYP3A locus: identification of a new, inducible CYP3A gene.
Proteins encoded by the human CYP3A genes metabolize every second drug currently in use. The activity of CYP3A gene products in the general population is highly variable and may affect the efficacy and safety of drugs metabolized by these enzymes. The mechanisms underlying this variability are poorly understood, but they include gene induction, protein inhibition and unknown genetic polymorphisms. To better understand the regulation of CYP3A expression and to provide a basis for a screen of genetic polymorphisms, we determined and analysed the sequence of the human CYP3A locus. The 231 kb locus sequence contains the three CYP3A genes described previously (CYP3A4, CYP3A5 and CYP3A7), three pseudogenes as well as a novel CYP3A gene termed CYP3A43. The gene encodes a putative protein with between 71.5% and 75.8% identity to the other CYP3A proteins. The highest expression level of CYP3A43 mRNA is observed in the prostate, an organ with extensive steroid metabolism. CYP3A43 is also expressed in several other tissues including liver, where it can be induced by rifampicin. CYP3A43 transcripts undergo extensive splicing. The identification of a new member of the CYP3A family and the characterization of the full CYP3A locus will aid efforts to identify the genetic variants underlying its variable expression. This, in turn, will lead to a better optimization of therapies involving the numerous substrates of CYP3A proteins.
Five novel natural allelic variants-951A-&gt;C, 1042G-&gt;A (D348N), 1156A-&gt;T (I386F), 1217G-&gt;A (C406Y) and 1291C-&gt;T (C431Y)-of the human CYP1A2 gene in a French Caucasian population.
Cloning of a novel phosphatidylinositol kinase-related kinase: characterization of the human SMG-1 RNA surveillance protein.
We have cloned and characterized a new member of the phosphatidylinositol kinase (PIK)-related kinase family. This gene, which we term human SMG-1 (hSMG-1), is orthologous to Caenorhabditis elegans SMG-1, a protein that functions in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). cDNA sequencing revealed that hSMG-1 encodes a protein of 3031 amino acids containing a conserved kinase domain, a C-terminal domain unique to the PIK-related kinases and an FKBP12-rapamycin binding-like domain similar to that found in the PIK-related kinase mTOR. Immunopurified FLAG-tagged hSMG-1 exhibits protein kinase activity as measured by autophosphorylation and phosphorylation of the generic PIK-related kinase substrate PHAS-1. hSMG-1 kinase activity is inhibited by high nanomolar concentrations of wortmannin (IC(50) = 105 nm) but is not inhibited by a FKBP12-rapamycin complex. Mutation of conserved residues within the kinase domain of hSMG-1 abolishes both autophosphorylation and substrate phosphorylation, demonstrating that hSMG-1 exhibits intrinsic protein kinase activity. hSMG-1 phosphorylates purified hUpf1 protein, a phosphoprotein that plays a critical role in NMD, at sites that are also phosphorylated in whole cells. Based on these data, we conclude that hSMG-1 is the human orthologue to C. elegans SMG-1. Our data indicate that hSMG-1 may function in NMD by directly phosphorylating hUpf1 protein at physiologically relevant sites.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an anesthetic-drug-induced, life-threatening hypermetabolic syndrome caused by abnormal calcium regulation in skeletal muscle. Often inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, MH has linkage to 30 different mutations in the RYR1 gene, which encodes a calcium-release-channel protein found in the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane in skeletal muscle. All published RYR1 mutations exclusively represent single-nucleotide changes. The present report documents, in exon 44 of RYR1 in two unrelated, MH-susceptible families, a 3-bp deletion that results in deletion of a conserved glutamic acid at position 2347. This is the first deletion, in RYR1, found to be associated with MH susceptibility. MH susceptibility was confirmed among some family members by in vitro diagnostic pharmacological contracture testing of biopsied skeletal muscle. Although a single-amino-acid deletion appears to be a subtle change in the protein, the deletion of Glu2347 from RYR1 produces an unusually large electrically evoked contraction tension in MH-positive individuals, suggesting that this deletion produces an alteration in skeletal-muscle calcium regulation, even in the absence of pharmacological agents.
Single-amino-acid deletion in the RYR1 gene, associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and unusual contraction phenotype.
ATR/ATM-mediated phosphorylation of human Rad17 is required for genotoxic stress responses.
Genotoxic stress triggers the activation of checkpoints that delay cell-cycle progression to allow for DNA repair. Studies in fission yeast implicate members of the Rad family of checkpoint proteins, which includes Rad17, Rad1, Rad9 and Hus1, as key early-response elements during the activation of both the DNA damage and replication checkpoints. Here we demonstrate a direct regulatory linkage between the human Rad17 homologue (hRad17) and the checkpoint kinases, ATM and ATR. Treatment of human cells with genotoxic agents induced ATM/ATR-dependent phosphorylation of hRad17 at Ser 635 and Ser 645. Overexpression of a hRad17 mutant (hRad17AA) bearing Ala substitutions at both phosphorylation sites abrogated the DNA-damage-induced G2 checkpoint, and sensitized human fibroblasts to genotoxic stress. In contrast to wild-type hRad17, the hRad17AA mutant showed no ionizing-radiation-inducible association with hRad1, a component of the hRad1-hRad9-hHus1 checkpoint complex. These findings demonstrate that ATR/ATM-dependent phosphorylation of hRad17 is a critical early event during checkpoint signalling in DNA-damaged cells.
Evidence for alternate splicing within the mRNA transcript encoding the DNA damage response kinase ATR.
Proper cellular response to genotoxic insult often requires the activity of one or more members of a family of high-molecular weight protein kinases referred to as phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PIK)-like proteins. While catalytic activity is an indispensable part of PIK-like protein function, little is currently known about factors that control their activity and/or functions. This deficiency stems, in large part, from our lack of knowledge concerning functionally significant subdomains within the large non-catalytic domain of these proteins. We have determined that the transcript encoding the PIK-like protein ATR undergoes alternate splicing within the region of the mRNA encoding its non-catalytic domain. This conclusion is based on the sequencing of a human expressed sequence tag clone encoding a portion of the ATR cDNA, and is supported by the results of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays conducted on total and polyA+ RNA, as well as sequencing of cloned RT-PCR products. Cloning and sequencing of a segment of human genomic DNA indicated that this event arises from splicing of a single 192 bp exon within the ATR gene. Analysis of several human tissues indicated that alternate ATR transcripts are differentially expressed, suggesting that this region of the ATR protein may be of functional importance.
Identification and functional characterization of eight CYP3A4 protein variants.
The genetic component of the inter-individual variability in CYP3A4 activity has been estimated to be between 60% and 90%, but the underlying genetic factors remain largely unknown. A study of 213 Middle and Western European DNA samples resulted in the identification of 18 new CYP3A4 variants, including eight protein variants. A total of 7.5% of the population studied was found to be heterozygous for one of these variants. In a bacterial heterologous expression system, two mutants, R130Q and P416L, did not result in detectable P450 holoprotein. One mutant, T363M, expressed at significantly lower levels than wild-type CYP3A4. G56D, V170I, D174H and M445T were not significantly different when compared with wild-type CYP3A4 in expression or steroid hydroxylase activity. L373F displayed a significantly altered testosterone metabolite profile and a four-fold increase in the Km value for 1'-OH midazolam formation. The results suggest a limited contribution of CYP3A4 protein variants to the inter-individual variability of CYP3A4 activity in Caucasians. Some variants may, however, play a role in the atypical response to drugs or altered sensitivity to carcinogens.
Identification and functional characterization of a novel ryanodine receptor mutation causing malignant hyperthermia in North American and South American families.
Malignant hyperthermia is a pharmacogenetic disorder associated with mutations in Ca(2+) regulatory proteins. It manifests as a hypermetabolic crisis triggered by commonly used anesthetics. Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility is a dominantly inherited predisposition to malignant hyperthermia that can be diagnosed by using caffeine/halothane contracture tests. In a multigenerational North American family with a severe form of malignant hyperthermia that has caused four deaths, a novel RYR1 A2350T missense mutation was identified in all individuals testing positive for malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. The same A2350T mutation was identified in an Argentinean family with two known fatal MH reactions. Functional analysis in HEK-293 cells revealed an altered Ca(2+) dependence and increased caffeine sensitivity of the expressed mutant protein thus confirming the pathogenic potential of the RYR1 A2350T mutation.
Human SMG-1, a novel phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinase, associates with components of the mRNA surveillance complex and is involved in the regulation of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a conserved surveillance mechanism that eliminates imperfect mRNAs that contain premature translation termination codons (PTCs) and code for nonfunctional or potentially harmful polypeptides. We show that a novel phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinase, hSMG-1, is a human ortholog of a product of Caenorhabditis elegans smg-1, one of seven smg genes involved in NMD. hSMG-1 phosphorylates hUPF1/SMG-2 in vivo and in vitro at specific serine residues in SQ motifs. hSMG-1 can associate with hUPF1/SMG-2 and other components of the surveillance complex. In particular, overexpression of a kinase-deficient point mutant of hSMG-1, hSMG-1-DA, results in a marked suppression of the PTC-dependent beta-globin mRNA degradation; whereas that of wild-type hSMG-1 enhances it. We also show that inhibitors of hSMG-1 induce the accumulation of truncated p53 proteins in human cancer cell lines with p53 PTC mutation. Taken together, we conclude that hSMG-1 plays a critical role in NMD through the direct phosphorylation of hUPF1/SMG-2 in the evolutionally conserved mRNA surveillance complex.
Role of human cytochrome P450 1A1, 1A2, 1B1, and 3A4 in the 2-, 4-, and 16alpha-hydroxylation of 17beta-estradiol.
The steady-state kinetics and specific activity of 2-, 4-, and 16alpha-hydroxylation of 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) were evaluated for human cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1, 1A2, 1B1, and 3A4 enzymes, using complementary DNA-expressed CYP isoforms. CYP1A2 showed the highest 2-hydroxylation activity, followed by CYP1A1, 1B1, and 3A4. CYP1B1 had the highest 4-hydroxylation activity, followed by CYP1A2, 1A1, and 3A4. The 16alpha-hydroxylation reaction was catalyzed mainly by CYP1A2 and, to a similar, slightly lower extent, CYP3A4 and 1A1, with a lesser contribution by CYP1B1. The E(2) 2-, 4-, and 16alpha-hydroxylation activities of human liver microsomes were 1.3 +/- 0.3, 0.5 +/- 0.06, and 0.3 +/-0.05 nmol metabolite/min/nmol P450, respectively. The contribution of CYP1A1 and 1B1 (mainly extrahepatic) to the E(2) hydroxylation reactions, relative to CYP1A2 and 3A4 (predominantly hepatic), may be relevant to understanding the process of hormonal carcinogenesis both in liver and in extrahepatic tissues.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a disorder of skeletal muscle manifested as a life-threatening hypermetabolic crisis in susceptible individuals after exposure to inhalational anesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants. Mutations in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) are considered a common cause of the disorder, and, to date, more than 20 RYR1 mutations have been reported in European and Canadian families. Some studies suggest that differences may exist in the frequencies and distribution of mutations in the RYR1 gene between European and North American MH families the frequency and distribution of mutations in the RYR1 gene.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Skeletal muscle samples from 73 unrelated individuals diagnosed as MH susceptible according to the North American MH caffeine-halothane contracture test were studied. Genomic DNA of MH-susceptible patients was investigated by polymerase chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism, single-strand conformation polymorphism, and sequencing analysis. The majority of known RYR1 mutations were analyzed using the restriction fragment length polymorphism method, whereas new mutations were searched by single-strand conformation polymorphism in exons 12, 15, 39, 40, 44, 45, and 46 of the gene.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Seven known RYR1 mutations (Arg163Cys, Gly248Arg, Arg614Cys, Val2168Met, Thr2206Met, Gly2434Arg, and Arg2454His) were detected at frequencies of 2.7, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4, 5.5, and 4.1%, respectively. In addition, three novel amino acid substitutions (Val2214Ile, Ala2367Thr, and Asp2431Asn) were detected at frequency of 1.4% each. These 10 mutations account for 21.9% of the North American MH-susceptible population.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;Three novel candidate mutations in the RYR1 gene were identified in these MH patients. The frequency and distribution of RYR1 mutations observed in this North American MH population was markedly different from that previously identified in Europe. Larger-scale studies are necessary to clarify the type and frequency of mutations in RYR1 associated with MH in North American families.
North American malignant hyperthermia population: screening of the ryanodine receptor gene and identification of novel mutations.
H2AX, a member of the histone H2A family, is rapidly phosphorylated in response to ionizing radiation. This phosphorylation, at an evolutionary conserved C-terminal phosphatidylinositol 3-OH-kinase-related kinase (PI3KK) motif, is thought to be critical for recognition and repair of DNA double strand breaks. Here we report that inhibition of DNA replication by hydroxyurea or ultraviolet irradiation also induces phosphorylation and foci formation of H2AX. These phospho-H2AX foci colocalize with proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), BRCA1, and 53BP1 at the arrested replication fork in S phase cells. This response is ATR-dependent but does not require ATM or Hus1. Our findings suggest that, in addition to its role in the recognition and repair of double strand breaks, H2AX also participates in the surveillance of DNA replication.
Histone H2AX is phosphorylated in an ATR-dependent manner in response to replicational stress.
1. Oxidation of 1,4-cineole, a monoterpene cyclic ether, was studied in rat and human liver microsomes and recombinant cytochrome P450 (P450 or CYP) enzymes expressed in insect cells in which human P450 and NADPH-P450 reductase cDNAs have been introduced. On analysis with gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, 2-exo-hydroxy-1,4-cineole was identified as a principal oxidation product of 1,4-cineole catalysed by rat and human P450 enzymes. 2. CYP3A4 was a major enzyme involved in the 2-hydroxylation of 1,4-cineole by human liver microsomes, based on the following lines of evidence. First, 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities catalysed by human liver microsomes were inhibited by ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of CYP3A activities, and an anti-CYP3A4 antibody. Second, there was a good correlation beteeen CYP3A4 contents and 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities in liver microsomes of eighteen human samples examined. Finally, of 10 recombinant human P450 enzymes examined, CYP3A4 had the highest activity for 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation. 3. Liver microsomal 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities were induced in rat by pregnenolone 16alpha-carbonitrile and dexamethasone and extensively inhibited by ketoconazole, indicative of the possible roles of CYP3A enzymes in this reaction. 4. Kinetic analysis showed that Vmax/Km for 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation catalysed by liver microsomes was higher in a human sample HL-104 (4.6 microM(-1) min(-1)) than those of rat treated with pregnenolone 16alpha-carbonitrile (0.49 microM(-1) min(-1)) and dexamethasone (0.36 microM(-1) min(-1)). 5. 1,8-Cineole, a structurally related monoterpene previously shown to be catalysed by CYP3A enzymes, inhibited 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation catalysed by human liver microsomes, whereas 1,4-cineole did not inhibit 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities. Both compounds caused inhibition of testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation by human liver microsomes, the former compound being more inhibitory than the latter. 6. These results suggest that 1,4-cineole and 1,8-cineole, two plant essential oils present in Citrus medica L. var. acida and Eucalyptus polybractea, respectively, are converted to 2-hydroxylated products by CYP3A enzymes in rat and human liver microsomes. It is unknown at present whether the 2-hydroxylation products of these compounds are more active biologically than the parent compound.
Roles of cytochrome P450 3A enzymes in the 2-hydroxylation of 1,4-cineole, a monoterpene cyclic ether, by rat and human liver microsomes.
Central core disease (CCD) is an autosomal dominant congenital myopathy. Diagnosis is based on the presence of cores in skeletal muscles. CCD has been linked to the gene encoding the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) and is considered to be an allelic disease of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. However, the report of a recessive form of transmission together with a variable clinical presentation has raised the question of the genetic heterogeneity of the disease. Analyzing a panel of 34 families exclusively recruited on the basis of both clinically and morphologically expressed CCD, 12 different mutations of the C-terminal domain of RYR1 have been identified in 16 unrelated families. Morphological analysis of the patients' muscles showed different aspects of cores, all of them associated with mutations in the C-terminal region of RYR1. Furthermore, we characterized the presence of neomutations in the RyR1 gene in four families. This indicates that neomutations into the RyR1 gene are not a rare event and must be taken into account for genetic studies of families that present with congenital myopathies type 'central core disease'. Three mutations led to the deletion in frame of amino acids. This is the first report of amino acid deletions in RYR1 associated with CCD. According to a four-transmembrane domain model, the mutations concentrated mostly in the myoplasmic and luminal loops linking, respectively, transmembrane domains T1 and T2 or T3 and T4 of RYR1.
Familial and sporadic forms of central core disease are associated with mutations in the C-terminal domain of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor.
CYP3A4 is the most abundant isoform of cytochrome P450 (CYP) in adult human liver. It metabolizes numerous clinically, physiologically, and toxicologically important compounds. The expression of CYP3A4 varies 40-fold in individual human livers, and metabolism of CYP3A4 substrates varies at least 10-fold in vivo. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in CYP3A4 were identified by direct sequencing of genomic DNA in 72 individuals from three different ethnic groups, including Caucasians, Blacks (African-Americans and African pygmies), and Asians. A total of 28 SNPs were identified, including five which produced coding changes M445T (CYP3A4*3), R162Q (CYP3A4*15), F189S (CYP3A4*17), L293P (CYP3A4*18), and P467S (CYP3A4*19). The latter four represent new alleic variants. Racial variability was observed for the frequency of individual SNPs. CYP3A R162Q was identified only in Black populations with an allelic frequency of 4%. CYP3A4 F189S and CYP3A4 M445T were identified in Caucasians with allelic frequencies 2% and 4%, respectively. L293P and P467S were only observed in Asians at allelic frequencies of 2%. The cDNAs for the F189S, L293P, M445T, and P467S mutant alleles were constructed by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in an Escherichia coli expression system. Testosterone and the insecticide chlorpyrifos were used to assess the catalytic activities of the most common CYP3A4 allele (CYP3A4*1) and its allelic variants. CYP3A4 F189S exhibited lower turnover numbers for testosterone and chlorpyrifos, while CYP3A4 L293P had higher turnover numbers for both substrates. The turnover numbers of the CYP3A4 M445T and P467S alleles to metabolize these compounds were not significantly different from those of wild-type CYP3A4.
Identification of variants of CYP3A4 and characterization of their abilities to metabolize testosterone and chlorpyrifos.
ATR and ATRIP: partners in checkpoint signaling.
The checkpoint kinases ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) and ATR (ATM and Rad3 related) transduce genomic stress signals to halt cell cycle progression and promote DNA repair. We report the identification of an ATR-interacting protein (ATRIP) that is phosphorylated by ATR, regulates ATR expression, and is an essential component of the DNA damage checkpoint pathway. ATR and ATRIP both localize to intranuclear foci after DNA damage or inhibition of replication. Deletion of ATR mediated by the Cre recombinase caused the loss of ATR and ATRIP expression, loss of DNA damage checkpoint responses, and cell death. Therefore, ATR is essential for the viability of human somatic cells. Small interfering RNA directed against ATRIP caused the loss of both ATRIP and ATR expression and the loss of checkpoint responses to DNA damage. Thus, ATRIP and ATR are mutually dependent partners in cell cycle checkpoint signaling pathways.
Accumulated recent evidence is indicating that alternative splicing represents a generalized process that increases the complexity of human gene expression. Here we show that mRNA production may not necessarily be limited to single genes, as human liver also has the potential to produce a variety of hybrid cytochrome P450 3A mRNA molecules. The four known cytochrome P450 3A genes in humans, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP3A7, and CYP3A43, share a high degree of similarity, consist of 13 exons with conserved exon-intron boundaries, and form a cluster on chromosome 7. The chimeric CYP3A mRNA molecules described herein are characterized by CYP3A43 exon 1 joined at canonical splice sites to distinct sets of CYP3A4 or CYP3A5 exons. Because the CYP3A43 gene is in a head-to-head orientation with the CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 genes, bypassing transcriptional termination can not account for the formation of hybrid CYP3A mRNAs. Thus, the mechanism generating these molecules has to be an RNA processing event that joins exons of independent pre-mRNA molecules, i.e. trans-splicing. Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, the ratio of one CYP3A43/3A4 intergenic combination was estimated to be approximately 0.15% that of the CYP3A43 mRNAs. Moreover, trans-splicing has been found not to interfere with polyadenylation. Heterologous expression of the chimeric species composed of CYP3A43 exon 1 joined to exons 2-13 of CYP3A4 revealed catalytic activity toward testosterone.
Intergenic mRNA molecules resulting from trans-splicing.
Identification of four novel mutations in the C-terminal membrane spanning domain of the ryanodine receptor 1: association with central core disease and alteration of calcium homeostasis.
The skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1; OMIM 180901) on chromosome 19q13.1 encodes the skeletal muscle calcium release channel. To date, more than 25 missense mutations have been identified in RYR1 and are associated with central core disease (CCD; OMIM 117000) and/or the malignant hyperthermia susceptibility phenotype (MHS1; OMIM 145600). The majority of RYR1 mutations are clustered in the N-terminal hydrophilic domain of the protein. Only four mutations have been identified so far in the highly conserved C-terminal region encoding the luminal/transmembrane domain of the protein which forms the ion pore. Three of these mutations have been found to segregate with pure or mixed forms of CCD. We have screened the C-terminal domain of the RYR1 gene for mutations in 50 European patients, diagnosed clinically and/or histologically as having CCD. We have identified five missense mutations (four of them novel) in 13 index patients. The mutations cluster in exons 101 and 102 and replace amino acids which are conserved in all known vertebrate RYR genes. In order to study the functional effect of these mutations, we have immortalized B-lymphocytes from some of the patients and studied their [Ca(2+)](i) homeostasis. We show that lymphoblasts carrying the newly identified RYR1 mutations exhibit: (i) a release of calcium from intracellular stores in the absence of any pharmacological activators of RYR; (ii) significantly smaller thapsigargin-sensitive intracellular calcium stores, compared to lymphoblasts from control individuals; and (iii) a normal sensitivity of the calcium release to the RYR inhibitor dantrolene. Our data suggest the C-terminal domain of RYR1 as a hot spot for mutations leading to the CCD phenotype. If the functional alterations of mutated RYR channels observed in lymphoblastoid cells are also present in skeletal muscles this could explain the predominant symptom of CCD, i.e. chronic muscle weakness. Finally, the study of calcium homeostasis in lymphoblastoid cells naturally expressing RYR1 mutations offers a novel non-invasive approach to gain insights into the pathogenesis of MH and CCD.
Cardiac excitation-contraction coupling.
Of the ions involved in the intricate workings of the heart, calcium is considered perhaps the most important. It is crucial to the very process that enables the chambers of the heart to contract and relax, a process called excitation-contraction coupling. It is important to understand in quantitative detail exactly how calcium is moved around the various organelles of the myocyte in order to bring about excitation-contraction coupling if we are to understand the basic physiology of heart function. Furthermore, spatial microdomains within the cell are important in localizing the molecular players that orchestrate cardiac function.
Hypoxia links ATR and p53 through replication arrest.
Previous studies have demonstrated that phosphorylation of human p53 on serine 15 contributes to protein stabilization after DNA damage and that this is mediated by the ATM family of kinases. However, cellular exposure to hypoxia does not induce any detectable level of DNA lesions compared to ionizing radiation, and the oxygen dependency of p53 protein accumulation differs from that of HIF-1, the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor. Here we show that, under severe hypoxic conditions, p53 protein accumulates only in S phase and this accumulation correlates with replication arrest. Inhibition of ATR kinase activity substantially reduces hypoxia-induced phosphorylation of p53 protein on serine 15 as well as p53 protein accumulation. Thus, hypoxia-induced cell growth arrest is tightly linked to an ATR-signaling pathway that is required for p53 modification and accumulation. These studies indicate that the ATR kinase plays an important role during tumor development in responding to hypoxia-induced replication arrest, and hypoxic conditions could select for the loss of key components of ATR-dependent checkpoint controls.
Common allelic variants of cytochrome P4503A4 and their prevalence in different populations.
Marked interindividual variability in expression of CYP3A4 influences the disposition of many endo- and xenobiotics, including the metabolism of steroids, environmental toxins and therapeutically useful drugs. The present study was designed to determine the genetic basis of CYP3A4 variability. We analysed DNA from 82 individuals with known CYP3A4 phenotype including 53 Caucasians and 21 African-American liver donors, seven individuals who were outliers in CYP3A4 metabolism and five individuals in a family of a poor nifedipine metabolizer. In addition, we analysed DNA from the eight person DNA Polymorphism Discovery Resource subset (Coriell Institute) and 89 individuals representing nine ethnic groups. Five non-synonymous mutations in the coding region of CYP3A4 were observed. CYP3A4*14 (T44C) in exon 1 resulted in an L15P change; CYP3A4*15 (G14387A) in exon 6 resulted in a R162Q substitution; CYP3A4*10 (G14422C) in exon 6 resulted in a D174H substitution; CYP3A4*16 (C15721G) in exon 7 resulted in a T185S amino acid substitution; and CYP3A4*12 (C22002T) in exon 11 resulted in a L373F change in the CYP3A4 protein. An additional six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 5'-UTR, 13 SNPs in the introns and three SNPs in the 3'-UTR were observed. Extensive population differences were observed in the frequencies of various CYP3A4 alleles. None of the 28 CYP3A4 SNPs identified in CYP3A4 phenotyped persons (most individuals being heterozygous for any CYP3A4 variant) was associated with low hepatic CYP3A4 protein expression or low CYP3A4 activity in vivo.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetical complication of general anesthesia resulting from abnormal Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR) via the type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1) in skeletal muscles. In this study, we analyzed the genomic DNAs prepared for determination of all the 106 exons of the RyR1 gene from blood samples donated by two MH patients with extremely high CICR rates in their biopsied skeletal muscles and a clear history of MH incidence. Two novel point mutations were found in the exons 96 and 101 with alterations in the coded amino acids within the C-terminal channel region, i.e., Pro4668 to Ser and Leu4838 to Val. The latter mutation was found in both MH patients. Rabbit RyR1 channels carrying corresponding mutations were expressed in CHO cells for functional assay. It was found that the L to V but not the P to S mutation of the RyR1 resulted in enhanced Ca2+ release activity. These results indicate that the L4838V mutation is responsible for the MH incidence. The L4838V mutation is unique because it is the mutation first found within a hydrophobic transmembrane segment of the channel region and should provide further information on the function of the RyR1 as well as for genetic diagnosis of MH.
Novel mutations in C-terminal channel region of the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia patients.
An unexpected finding of the human genome was the large fraction of the genome organized as blocks of interspersed duplicated sequence. We provide a comparative and phylogenetic analysis of a highly duplicated region of 16p12.2, which is composed of at least four different segmental duplications spanning in excess of 160 kb. We contrast the dispersal of two different segmental duplications (LCR16a and LCR16u). LCR16a, a 20 kb low-copy repeat sequence A from chromosome 16, was shown previously to contain a rapidly evolving novel hominoid gene family (morpheus) that had expanded within the last 10 million years of great ape/human evolution. We compare the dispersal of this genomic segment with a second adjacent duplication called LCR16u. The duplication contains a second putative gene family (KIAA0220/SMG1) that is represented approximately eight times within the human genome. A high degree of sequence identity (approximately 98%) was observed among the various copies of LCR16u. Comparative analyses with Old World monkey species show that LCR16a and LCR16u originated from two distinct ancestral loci. Within the human genome, at least 70% of the LCR16u copies were duplicated in concert with the LCR16a duplication. In contrast, only 30% of the chimpanzee loci show an association between LCR16a and LCR16u duplications. The data suggest that the two copies of genomic sequence were brought together during the chimpanzee/human divergence and were subsequently duplicated as a larger cassette specifically within the human lineage. The evolutionary history of these two chromosome-specific duplications supports a model of rapid expansion and evolutionary turnover among the genomes of man and the great apes.
Divergent origins and concerted expansion of two segmental duplications on chromosome 16.
Preferential binding of ATR protein to UV-damaged DNA.
The ATR protein is a member of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-related kinase family and plays an important role in UV-induced DNA damage checkpoint response. Its role as a signal transducer in cell cycle checkpoint is well established, but it is currently unclear whether ATR functions as a damage sensor as well. Here we have purified the ATR protein and investigated its interaction with DNA by using biochemical analysis and electron microscopy. We find that ATR is a DNA-binding protein with higher affinity to UV-damaged than undamaged DNA. In addition, damaged DNA stimulates the kinase activity of ATR to a significantly higher level than undamaged DNA. Our data suggest that ATR may function as an initial sensor in the DNA damage checkpoint response.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;The ryanodine receptor of the skeletal muscle (RYR1) seems to be of outstanding importance in the pathogenesis of malignant hyperthermia (MH). It has been shown that point mutations in the RYR1 gene are strongly associated with the MH phenotype. A correctly determined phenotype is the basic prerequisite for adequate genetic MH screening. In this study we examined only those MH susceptible patients for the presence of potential RYR1 mutations who showed strong pathological muscle responses in the in vitro contracture test (IVCT).&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;A total of 56 MHS index patients who complied with the following IVCT criteria were included in the molecular genetic investigation: Contracture forces &gt; or =4 mN at a caffeine concentration of 2.0 mmol/l and &gt; or =8 mN at a halothane concentration of 0.44 mmol/l. DNA sequences of exons 2, 6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 39, 40, 45, 46, 102 of the RYR1 gene were analysed by the direct sequencing technique. Furthermore, if an MH mutation was identified in an index patient, all relatives were screened for their family specific RYR1 defect.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;In 39 index patients an RYR1 mutation was detected: Arg163Cys (n = 2), Asp166Asn (n = 1), Gly341Arg (n = 2), Arg401His (n = 2), Arg614Cys (n = 12), Asp2129Glu (n = 1),Vol2168Met (n = 1), Thr2206Met (n = 9), Ala2428Thr (n = 1), Gly2434Arg (n = 2), Arg2435His (n = 1), Arg2452Trp (n = 1), Arg2454His (n = 4). Three new RYR1 mutations were identified. We found a potential MH mutation in a further 130 relatives of the 39 index patients. Thirty-seven individuals were classified as MHS exclusively by molecular genetic techniques and did not have to undergo the IVCT.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The ascertained high rate of successful MH mutation screening (69.64%) is obviously associated with the more clearly defined MHS diagnosis in the IVCT. According to the EMHG guidelines for the molecular genetic detection of MH susceptibility, a positive MH disposition could be determined in numerous persons by a less invasive technique.
Mutation screening in the ryanodine receptor 1 gene (RYR1) in patients susceptible to malignant hyperthermia who show definite IVCT results: identification of three novel mutations.
Malignant hyperthermia associated with exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis or congenital abnormalities and a novel RYR1 mutation in New Zealand and Australian pedigrees.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is rarely associated with specific myopathies or musculoskeletal abnormalities. Three clinical investigations of MH associated with either non-specific myopathies or congenital disorders in three separate families are presented. Two of these cases also show evidence of exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis. In each case MH susceptibility was confirmed by in vitro contracture testing of quadriceps muscle. DNA sequence analysis of each kindred revealed the presence of a common novel mutation that results in an arginine401-cysteine substitution in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1). Haplotype analysis using chromosome 19q markers indicated that the three families are likely to be unrelated, providing confirmation that the MH/central core disease region 1 of RYR1 is a mutation hot spot.
Clinical and molecular characterization of patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (RyR2) underlie catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), an inherited arrhythmogenic disease occurring in the structurally intact heart. The proportion of patients with CPVT carrying RyR2 mutations is unknown, and the clinical features of RyR2-CPVT as compared with nongenotyped CPVT are undefined.&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;Patients with documented polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias occurring during physical or emotional stress with a normal heart entered the study. The clinical phenotype of the 30 probands and of 118 family members was evaluated, and mutation screening on the RyR2 gene was performed. Arrhythmias documented in probands were: 14 of 30 bidirectional ventricular tachycardia, 12 of 30 polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, and 4 of 30 catecholaminergic idiopathic ventricular fibrillation; RyR2 mutations were identified in 14 of 30 probands (36% bidirectional ventricular tachycardia, 58% polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, 50% catecholaminergic idiopathic ventricular fibrillation) and in 9 family members (4 silent gene carriers). Genotype-phenotype analysis showed that patients with RyR2 CPVT have events at a younger age than do patients with nongenotyped CPVT and that male sex is a risk factor for syncope in RyR2-CPVT (relative risk=4.2).&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;CPVT is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease manifesting beyond pediatric age with a spectrum of polymorphic arrhythmias. beta-Blockers reduce arrhythmias, but in 30% of patients an implantable defibrillator may be required. Genetic analysis identifies two groups of patients: Patients with nongenotyped CPVT are predominantly women and become symptomatic later in life; patients with RyR2 CPVT become symptomatic earlier, and men are at higher risk of cardiac events. These data provide a rationale for prompt evaluation and treatment of young men with RyR2 mutations.
&lt;h4&gt;Objectives&lt;/h4&gt;We sought to establish the role of genetic screening for ryanodine receptor type 2 (RyR2) gene mutations in families with effort-induced polymorphic ventricular arrhythmia (PVA), syncope and juvenile sudden death.&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;The RyR2 mutations have been associated with PVA, syncope and sudden death in response to physical or emotional stress.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;We studied 81 subjects (39 males and 42 females; mean age 31 +/-20 years) belonging to eight families with pathogenic RyR2 mutations. All subjects underwent screening for RyR2 mutations, electrocardiography (ECG), 24-h Holter monitoring, signal-averaged electrocardiography (SAECG), two-dimensional echocardiography and exercise stress testing. Electrophysiologic (EP) study was performed in nine patients.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Six different RyR2 mutations were found in eight families. Forty-three family members carried the gene mutation. Of these, 28 (65%) showed effort-induced arrhythmic symptoms or signs and one died suddenly during follow-up. Family history revealed 19 juvenile cases of sudden death during effort or emotion. In two families sharing the same mutation, no subject presented with PVA during the stress test; thus, sudden death and syncope were the only clinical manifestations. The 12-lead ECG was normal in all but two subjects, whereas five patients showed positive late potentials on the SAECG. In 17 (39.5%) of 43 subjects, the two-dimensional echocardiogram revealed localized kinetic abnormalities and mild structural alterations of the right ventricle. The EP study was not able to induce PVA.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The absence of symptoms and PVA on the stress test in more than one-third of carriers of RyR2 mutations, as well as the lack of PVA inducibility by the EP study, underlies the importance of genetic screening for the early diagnosis of asymptomatic carriers and prevention of sudden death.
Screening for ryanodine receptor type 2 mutations in families with effort-induced polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death: early diagnosis of asymptomatic carriers.
A recessive form of central core disease, transiently presenting as multi-minicore disease, is associated with a homozygous mutation in the ryanodine receptor type 1 gene.
Multi-minicore disease is an autosomal recessive congenital myopathy characterized by the presence of multiple, short-length core lesions (minicores) in both muscle fiber types. These lesions being nonspecific and the clinical phenotype being heterogeneous, multi-minicore disease boundaries remain unclear. To identify its genetic basis, we performed a genome-wide screening in a consanguineous Algerian family in which three children presented in infancy with moderate weakness predominant in axial muscles, pelvic girdle and hands, joint hyperlaxity (hand involvement phenotype), and multiple minicores. We mapped the disease to chromosome 19q13 in this family and, subsequently, in three additional families showing a similar phenotype, with a maximum LOD score of 5.19 for D19S570. This locus was excluded in 16 other multi-minicore disease families with predominantly axial weakness, scoliosis, and respiratory insufficiency ("classical" phenotype). In the Algerian family, we identified a novel homozygous missense mutation (P3527S) in the ryanodine receptor type 1 gene, a positional candidate gene responsible for the autosomal dominant congenital myopathy central core disease. New muscle biopsies from the three patients at adulthood demonstrated typical central core disease with rods; no cores were found in the healthy parents. This subgroup of families linked to 19q13 represents the first variant of central core disease with genetically proven recessive inheritance and transient presentation as multi-minicore disease.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant disorder that predisposes susceptible individuals to a potentially life-threatening crisis when exposed to commonly used anesthetics. Mutations in the skeletal muscle calcium release channel, ryanodine receptor (RYR1) are associated with MH in over 50% of affected families. Linkage analysis of the RYR1 gene region at 19q13 was performed in a large Brazilian family and a distinct disease co-segregating haplotype was revealed in the majority of members with diagnosis of MH. Subsequent sequencing of RYR1 mutational hot spots revealed a nucleotide substitution of C to T at position 7062, causing a novel amino acid change from Arg2355 to Cys associated with MH in the family. Haplotype analysis of the RYR1 gene area at 19q13 in the family with multiple MH members is an important tool in identification of genetic cause underlying this disease.
Novel skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor mutation in a large Brazilian family with malignant hyperthermia.
Autosomal recessive inheritance of RYR1 mutations in a congenital myopathy with cores.
Central core disease (CCD) is a congenital myopathy due to dominant mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1). The authors report three patients from two consanguineous families with symptoms of a congenital myopathy, cores on muscle biopsy, and confirmed linkage to the RYR1 locus. Molecular genetic studies in one family identified a V4849I homozygous missense mutation in the RYR1 gene. This report suggests a congenital myopathy associated with recessive RYR1 mutations.
Construction of expression-ready cDNA clones for KIAA genes: manual curation of 330 KIAA cDNA clones.
We have accumulated information on protein-coding sequences of uncharacterized human genes, which are known as KIAA genes, through cDNA sequencing. For comprehensive functional analysis of the KIAA genes, it is necessary to prepare a set of cDNA clones which direct the synthesis of functional KIAA gene products. However, since the KIAA cDNAs were derived from long mRNAs (&gt; 4 kb), it was not expected that all of them were full-length. Thus, as the first step toward preparing these clones, we evaluated the integrity of protein-coding sequences of KIAA cDNA clones through comparison with homologous protein entries in the public database. As a result, 1141 KIAA cDNAs had at least one homologous entry in the database, and 619 of them (54%) were found to be truncated at the 5' and/or 3' ends. In this study, 290 KIAA cDNA clones were tailored to be full-length or have considerably longer sequences than the original clones by isolating additional cDNA clones and/or connected parts of additional cDNAs or PCR products of the missing portion to the original cDNA clone. Consequently, 265, 8, and 17 predicted CDSs of KIAA cDNA clones were increased in the amino-, carboxy-, and both terminal sequences, respectively. In addition, 40 cDNA clones were modified to remove spurious interruption of protein-coding sequences. The total length of the resultant extensions at amino- and carboxy-terminals of KIAA gene products reached 97,000 and 7,216 amino acid residues, respectively, and various protein domains were found in these extended portions.
Mutations in the ryanodine receptor type 1 (RYR1) gene are associated with Malignant Hyperthermia (MH) and Central Core Disease (CCD). We report here on the molecular analysis of the RYR1 gene in Italian families referred as potential cases of MH or in patients with CCD or multicore/minicore myopathy. Of a total of 20 individuals with mutations in the RYR1 gene, 14 were part of a group of 47 MH susceptible (MHS) patients, 4 of 34 individuals diagnosed as MH equivocal (MHE), and 2 were patients diagnosed with minicore myopathy and CCD, respectively. Mutations were found to segregate with the MHS or MHE phenotype within the families of the probands. A discordance between phenotype and genotype was observed in a family where a mutation detected in an MHS proband was also found in the father who had been diagnosed MH normal (MHN) at the IVCT. In addition to known mutations, seven novel mutations were found, five of which occurred in exons encoding the C-terminal region of RYR1. These results indicate that the C-terminal region of RYR1 represents an additional hot spot for mutations in patients with MH, similar to what has been reported for patients with CCD.
Mutations in the RYR1 gene in Italian patients at risk for malignant hyperthermia: evidence for a cluster of novel mutations in the C-terminal region.
