Mutation screening of the RYR1 gene and identification of two novel mutations in Italian malignant hyperthermia families.
Point mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene are associated with malignant hyperthermia, an autosomal dominant disorder triggered in susceptible people (MHS) by volatile anaesthetics and depolarising skeletal muscle relaxants.
 To date, 17 missense point mutations have been identified in the human RYR1 gene by screening of the cDNA obtained from muscle biopsies.
 Here we report single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) screening for nine of the most frequent RYR1 mutations using genomic DNA isolated from MHS patients.
 In addition, the Argl63Cys mutation was analysed by restriction enzyme digestion.
 We analysed 57 unrelated patients and detected seven of the known RYR1 point mutations.
 Furthermore, we found a new mutation, Arg2454His, segregating with the MHS phenotype in a large pedigree and a novel amino acid substitution at position 2436 in another patient, indicating a 15.8% frequency of these mutations in Italian patients.
 A new polymorphic site in intron 16 that causes the substitution of a G at position -7 with a C residue was identified.
A mutation in the transmembrane/luminal domain of the ryanodine receptor is associated with abnormal Ca(2+) release channel function and severe central core disease.
Central core disease is a rare, nonprogressive myopathy that is characterized by hypotonia and proximal muscle weakness.
 In a large Mexican kindred with an unusually severe and highly penetrant form of the disorder, DNA sequencing identified an I4898T mutation in the C-terminal transmembrane/luminal region of the RyR1 protein that constitutes the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor.
 All previously reported RYR1 mutations are located either in the cytoplasmic N terminus or in a central cytoplasmic region of the 5,038-aa protein.
 The I4898T mutation was introduced into a rabbit RYR1 cDNA and expressed in HEK-293 cells.
 The response of the mutant RyR1 Ca2+ channel to the agonists halothane and caffeine in a Ca2+ photometry assay was completely abolished.
 Coexpression of normal and mutant RYR1 cDNAs in a 1:1 ratio, however, produced RyR1 channels with normal halothane and caffeine sensitivities, but maximal levels of Ca2+ release were reduced by 67%.
 [3H]Ryanodine binding indicated that the heterozygous channel is activated by Ca2+ concentrations 4-fold lower than normal.
 Single-cell analysis of cotransfected cells showed a significantly increased resting cytoplasmic Ca2+ level and a significantly reduced luminal Ca2+ level.
 These data are indicative of a leaky channel, possibly caused by a reduction in the Ca2+ concentration required for channel activation.
 Comparison with two other coexpressed mutant/normal channels suggests that the I4898T mutation produces one of the most abnormal RyR1 channels yet investigated, and this level of abnormality is reflected in the severe and penetrant phenotype of affected central core disease individuals.
Establishment of transgenic cell line CHL-3A4 and its metabolic activation.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To establish a model cell line CHL-3A4 to study metabolic pathways for some genotoxic chemicals.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Complimentary DNA (cDNA) of cloned cytochrome P450-3A4 gene in human liver tissue was transferred to Bluescript M13 vector with reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and DNA recombinant techniques.
 Restriction endonuclease map analysis and sequencing of partial cloned fragment proved that CYP3A4 cDNA was cloned into Bluescript M13 vector.
 Then, recombinant expression plasmid pREP9-3A4 was constructed in eukaryotic cell and transfected into Chinese hamster CHL cells.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;It was proved that a CHL-3A4 transgenic cell line was established, which could lead metabolic activation for aflatoxin B1 (AFB1), sterigmatocystin (STC) and cyclophosphamide (CPA).
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;The CHL-3A4 cell line established did express human cytochrome P450 3A4 and could lead metabolic activation for three genotoxic chemicals AFB1, STC and CPA.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) in man is an autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle Ca(2+)-regulation.
 During anesthesia in predisposed individuals, it is triggered by volatile anesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants.
 In &gt;50% of the families, MH susceptibility is linked to the gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1), the calcium release channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, on chromosome 19q12-13.2.
 To date, 21 RYR1 mutations have been identified in a number of pedigrees.
 Four of them are also associated with central core disease (CCD), a congenital myopathy.
 Screening for these 21 mutations in 105 MH families including 10 CCD families phenotyped by the in vitro contracture test (IVCT) according to the European protocol revealed the following approximate distribution: 9% Arg-614-Cys, 1% Arg-614-Leu, 1% Arg-2163-Cys, 1% Val-2168-Met, 3% Thr-2206-Met and 7% Gly-2434-Arg.
 In one CCD family, the disease was caused by a recently reported MH mutation, Arg-2454-His.
 Two novel mutations, Thr-2206-Arg and Arg-2454-Cys were detected, each in a single pedigree.
 In the 109 individuals of the 25 families with RYR1 mutations cosegregation between genetic result and IVCT was almost perfect, only three genotypes were discordant with the IVCT phenotypes, suggesting a true sensitivity of 98.5% and a specificity of minimally 81.8% for this test.
 Screening of the transmembraneous region of RYR1 did not yield a new mutation confirming the cytosolic portion of the protein to be of main functional importance for disease pathogenesis.
Screening of the ryanodine receptor gene in 105 malignant hyperthermia families: novel mutations and concordance with the in vitro contracture test.
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)- and Rad3-related protein (ATR) is a phosphatidylinositol-kinase (PIK)-related kinase that has been implicated in the response of human cells to multiple forms of DNA damage and may play a role in the DNA replication checkpoint.
 The purification of an ATR complex allowed identification of chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 4 (CHD4) as an ATR-associated protein by tandem mass spectrometric sequencing.
 CHD4 (also called Mi-2beta) is a component of a histone-deacetylase-2 (HDAC2)-containing complex, the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylating (NRD) complex.
 Endogenous ATR, CHD4, and HDAC2 are shown to coimmunoprecipitate, and ATR and HDAC2 coelute through two biochemical purification steps.
 Other members of the NRD complex, HDAC1, MTA1, and MTA2, are also detectable in ATR immunoprecipitates.
 ATR's association with CHD4 and HDAC2 suggests that there may be a linkage between ATR's role in mediating checkpoints induced by DNA damage and chromatin modulation via remodeling and deacetylation.
Molecular association between ATR and two components of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylating complex, HDAC2 and CHD4.
Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain.
We have conducted a sequencing project of human cDNAs which encode large proteins in brain.
 For selection of cDNA clones to be sequenced in this project, cDNA clones have been experimentally examined by in vitro transcription/translation prior to sequencing.
 In this study, we tested an alternative approach for picking up cDNA clones having a high probability of carrying protein coding region.
 This approach exploited 5'-end single-pass sequence data and the GeneMark program for assessing protein-coding potential, and allowed us to select 74 clones out of 14,804 redundant cDNA clones.
 The complete sequence data of these 74 clones revealed that 45% of them encoded proteins consisting of more than 500 amino acid residues while all the clones thus selected carried possible protein coding sequences as expected.
 The results indicated that the GeneMark analysis of 5'-end sequences of cDNAs offered us a simple and effective means to select cDNA clones with protein-coding potential although the sizes of the encoded proteins could not be predicted.
ATR is a caffeine-sensitive, DNA-activated protein kinase with a substrate specificity distinct from DNA-PK.
ATR is a large, &gt; 300 kDa protein containing a carboxy-terminus kinase domain related to PI-3 kinase, and is homologous to the ATM gene product in human cells and the rad3/MEC1 proteins in yeast.
 These proteins, together with the DNA-PK, are part of a new family of PI-3 kinase related proteins.
 All members of this family play important roles in checkpoints which operate to permit cell survival following many forms of DNA damage.
 We have expressed ATR protein in HEK293 cells and purified the protein to near-homogeneity.
 We show that pure ATR is a protein kinase which is activated by circular single-stranded, double-stranded or linear DNA.
 Thus ATR is a new member of a sub-family of PIK related kinases, founded by the DNA-PK, which are activated in the presence of DNA.
 Unlike DNA-PK, ATR does not appear to require Ku proteins for its activation by DNA.
 We show directly that, like ATM and DNA-PK, ATR phosphorylates the genome surveillance protein p53 on serine 15, a site which is up-regulated in response to DNA damage.
 In addition, we find that ATR has a substrate specificity similar to, but unique from, the DNA-PK in vitro, suggesting that these proteins have overlapping but distinct functions in vivo.
 Finally, we find that the kinase activity of ATR in the presence and absence of DNA is suppressed by caffeine, a compound which is known to induce loss of checkpoint control.
 Our results are consistent with the notion that ATR plays a role in monitoring DNA structure and phosphorylation of proteins involved in the DNA damage response pathways.
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) phosphorylates p53 protein in response to ionizing radiation, but the complex phenotype of AT cells suggests that it must have other cellular substrates as well.
 To identify substrates for ATM and the related kinases ATR and DNA-PK, we optimized in vitro kinase assays and developed a rapid peptide screening method to determine general phosphorylation consensus sequences.
 ATM and ATR require Mn(2+), but not DNA ends or Ku proteins, for optimal in vitro activity while DNA-PKCs requires Mg(2+), DNA ends, and Ku proteins.
 From p53 peptide mutagenesis analysis, we found that the sequence S/TQ is a minimal essential requirement for all three kinases.
 In addition, hydrophobic amino acids and negatively charged amino acids immediately NH(2)-terminal to serine or threonine are positive determinants and positively charged amino acids in the region are negative determinants for substrate phosphorylation.
 We determined a general phosphorylation consensus sequence for ATM and identified putative in vitro targets by using glutathione S-transferase peptides as substrates.
 Putative ATM in vitro targets include p95/nibrin, Mre11, Brca1, Rad17, PTS, WRN, and ATM (S440) itself.
 Brca2, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and DNA-5B peptides were phosphorylated specifically by ATR, and DNA Ligase IV is a specific in vitro substrate of DNA-PK.
Substrate specificities and identification of putative substrates of ATM kinase family members.
Novel mutation in the RYR1 gene (R2454C) in a patient with malignant hyperthermia.
CYP3A4 allelic variants with amino acid substitutions in exons 7 and 12: evidence for an allelic variant with altered catalytic activity.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To determine the existence of mutant and variant CgammaP3A4 alleles in three racial groups and to assess functions of the variant alleles by complementary deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA) expression.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;A bacterial artificial chromosome that contains the complete CgammaP3A4 gene was isolated and the exons and surrounding introns were directly sequenced to develop primers to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplify and sequence the gene from lymphocyte DNA.
 DNA samples from Chinese, black, and white subjects were screened.
 Mutating the affected amino acid in the wild-type cDNA and expressing the variant enzyme with use of the baculovirus system was used to functionally evaluate the variant allele having a missense mutation.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;To investigate the existence of mutant and variant CgammaP3A4 alleles in humans, all 13 exons and the 5'-flanking region of the human CgammaP3A4 gene in three racial groups were sequenced and four alleles were identified.
 An A--&gt;G point mutation in the 5'-flanking region of the human CgammaP3A4 gene, designated CgammaP3A4*1B, was found in the three different racial groups.
 The frequency of this allele in a white population was 4.2%, whereas it was 66.7% in black subjects.
 The CgammaP3A4*1B allele was not found in Chinese subjects.
 A second variant allele, designated CgammaP3A4*2, having a Ser222Pro change, was found at a frequency of 2.7% in the white population and was absent in the black subjects and Chinese subjects analyzed.
 Baculovirus-directed cDNA expression revealed that the CYP3A4*2 P450 had a lower intrinsic clearance for the CYP3A4 substrate nifedipine compared with the wild-type enzyme but was not significantly different from the wild-type enzyme for testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation.
 Another rare allele, designated CgammaP3A4*3, was found in a single Chinese subject who had a Met445Thr change in the conserved heme-binding region of the P450.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;These are the first examples of potential function polymorphisms resulting from missense mutations in the CgammaP3A4 gene.
 The CgammaP3A4*2 allele was found to encode a P450 with substrate-dependent altered kinetics compared with the wild-type P450.
Biosynthesis of all-trans-retinoic acid from all-trans-retinol: catalysis of all-trans-retinol oxidation by human P-450 cytochromes.
Oxidative conversion of all-trans-retinol (t-ROH) to all-trans-retinal (t-RAL) is recognized as the rate-limiting step for biosynthesis of all-trans-retinoic acid from t-ROH in mammalian hepatic tissues.
 The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of human cytochrome P-450 (CYP)-dependent monooxygenation in the conversion of t-ROH to t-RAL.
 Adult human liver microsomes (HLMS) were incubated with t-ROH, and retinoids generated were identified and quantified by liquid chromatography-mass spectroscopy, HPLC, and other methods.
 HLMS-catalyzed generation of t-RAL from t-ROH was primarily NADPH-dependent and was strongly inhibited by carbon monoxide.
 Rates of reactions increased linearly with time and concentrations of HLMS, and exhibited classical substrate saturation.
 These observations strongly indicated that the reaction proceeded via CYP-catalyzed monooxygenation.
 On the basis of responses to selective chemical inhibitors, isoforms from CYP family 1 and the CYP3A subfamily appeared to be very active.
 Members of the CYP2C subfamily and CYP2D6 exhibited lesser activities and CYP2A6, CYP2B6, and CYP2E1 were virtually inactive.
 cDNA-expressed human CYP enzymes (CYP SUPERSOMES) also were used to assess the capacity of individual CYP enzymes to catalyze the reaction.
 Based on responses to selective chemical inhibitors, specific activities, and levels present in adult human hepatic tissues, CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 strongly appeared to be the major CYP enzymes catalyzing hepatic oxidative conversion of t-ROH to t-RAL in the adult human liver.
 CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 SUPERSOMES both exhibited exceptionally high activities, and in extrahepatic tissues, these isoforms could play important roles in biosynthesis of all-trans-retinoic acid from t-ROH.
&lt;h4&gt;Aims&lt;/h4&gt;Albendazole (ABZ; methyl 5-propylthio-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl carbamate) is a broad spectrum anthelmintic whose activity resides both in the parent compound and its sulphoxide metabolite (ABS).
 There are numerous reports of ABZ metabolism in animals but relatively few in humans.
 We have investigated the sulphoxidation of ABZ in human liver microsomes and recombinant systems.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The specific enzymes involved in the sulphoxidation of ABZ were determined by a combination of approaches; inhibition with an antiserum directed against cytochrome P450 reductase, the effect of selective chemical inhibitors on ABZ sulphoxidation in human liver microsomes, the capability of expressed CYP and FMO to mediate the formation of ABS, regression analysis of the rate of metabolism of ABZ to ABS in human liver microsomes against selective P450 substrates and regression analysis of the rate of ABS sulphoxidation against CYP expression measured by Western blotting.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Comparison of Vmax values obtained following heat inactivation (3min at 45 degrees C) of flavin monoxygenases (FMO), chemical inhibition of FMO with methimazole and addition of an antiserum directed against cytochrome P450 reductase indicate that FMO and CYP contribute approximately 30% and 70%, respectively, to ABS production in vitro.
 Comparison of CLint values suggests CYP is a major contributor in vivo.
 A significant reduction in ABZ sulphoxidation (n = 3) was seen with ketoconazole (CYP3 A4; 32-37%), ritonavir (CYP3 A4: 34-42%), methimazole (FMO: 28-49%) and thioacetamide (FMO; 32-35%).
 Additive inhibition with ketoconazole and methimazole was 69 +/-8% (n = 3).
 ABS production in heat - treated microsomes (3 min at 45 degrees C) correlated significantly with testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (CYP3A4; P &lt; 0.05) and band intensities on Western blots probed with an antibody selective for 3A4 (P &lt; 0.05).
 Recombinant human CYP3 A4, CYP1A2 and FMO3 produced ABS in greater quantities than control microsomes, with those expressing CYP3A4 producing threefold more ABS than those expressing CYP1A2.
 Kinetic studies showed the Km values obtained with both CYP3A4 and FMO3 were similar.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;We conclude that the production of ABS in human liver is mediated via both FMO and CYP, principally CYP3A4, with the CYP component being the major contributor.
Relative contribution of cytochromes P-450 and flavin-containing monooxygenases to the metabolism of albendazole by human liver microsomes.
Malignant hyperthermia in infancy and identification of novel RYR1 mutation.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) has been reported as non-existent in children less than 1 yr old, although several unconfirmed reports have been published.
 A case report of MH in a 6-month-old child is presented, with confirmation of MH susceptibility by in vitro contracture testing of quadriceps muscle at 13 yr old.
 Genetic analysis revealed a novel RYR1 mutation that substitutes arginine 2452 for tryptophan in a region of the calcium channel mutated in several other MH pedigrees.
PKA phosphorylation dissociates FKBP12.6 from the calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor): defective regulation in failing hearts.
The ryanodine receptor (RyR)/calcium release channel on the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) is the major source of calcium (Ca2+) required for cardiac muscle excitation-contraction (EC) coupling.
 The channel is a tetramer comprised of four type 2 RyR polypeptides (RyR2) and four FK506 binding proteins (FKBP12.6).
 We show that protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation of RyR2 dissociates FKBP12.6 and regulates the channel open probability (Po).
 Using cosedimentation and coimmunoprecipitation we have defined a macromolecular complex comprised of RyR2, FKBP12.6, PKA, the protein phosphatases PP1 and PP2A, and an anchoring protein, mAKAP.
 In failing human hearts, RyR2 is PKA hyperphosphorylated, resulting in defective channel function due to increased sensitivity to Ca2+-induced activation.
Chk1, an evolutionarily conserved protein kinase, has been implicated in cell cycle checkpoint control in lower eukaryotes.
 By gene disruption, we show that CHK1 deficiency results in a severe proliferation defect and death in embryonic stem (ES) cells, and peri-implantation embryonic lethality in mice.
 Through analysis of a conditional CHK1-deficient cell line, we demonstrate that ES cells lacking Chk1 have a defective G(2)/M DNA damage checkpoint in response to gamma-irradiation (IR).
 CHK1 heterozygosity modestly enhances the tumorigenesis phenotype of WNT-1 transgenic mice.
 We show that in human cells, Chk1 is phosphorylated on serine 345 (S345) in response to UV, IR, and hydroxyurea (HU).
 Overexpression of wild-type Atr enhances, whereas overexpression of the kinase-defective mutant Atr inhibits S345 phosphorylation of Chk1 induced by UV treatment.
 Taken together, these data indicate that Chk1 plays an essential role in the mammalian DNA damage checkpoint, embryonic development, and tumor suppression, and that Atr regulates Chk1.
Chk1 is an essential kinase that is regulated by Atr and required for the G(2)/M DNA damage checkpoint.
A novel ryanodine receptor mutation and genotype-phenotype correlation in a large malignant hyperthermia New Zealand Maori pedigree.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder that predisposes to a sometimes fatal hypermetabolic reaction to halogenated anaesthetics.
 MH is considered to originate from abnormal regulation of skeletal muscle Ca(2+) release.
 Current diagnosis of MH susceptibility (MHS) relies on in vitro contracture testing (IVCT) of skeletal muscle.
 The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) encoding the major Ca(2+) release channel in the skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum has been shown to be mutated in a number of MH pedigrees.
 The large Maori pedigree reported here is the largest MHS pedigree investigated to date and comprises five probands who experienced clinical episodes of MH and 130 members diagnosed by the IVCT.
 Sequencing of the 15 117 bp RYR1 cDNA in a MHS individual from this pedigree identified a novel C14477T transition that results in a Thr4826 to Ile substitution in the C-terminal region/transmembrane loop of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor.
 This is the first mutation in the RyR1 C-terminal region associated solely with MHS.
 Although linkage analysis showed strong linkage (max LOD, 11.103 at theta = 0.133) between the mutation and MHS in the pedigree using the standardized European IVCT phenotyping protocol, 22 MHS recombinants were observed.
 The relationship between the IVCT response and genotype was explored and showed that as IVCT diagnostic cut-off points were made increasingly stringent, the number of MHS discordants decreased with complete concordance between the presence or absence of the C14477T mutation and MHS and MH normal phenotypes, respectively, using a cut-off of 1.2 g tension at 2.0 mM caffeine and 1.8 g tension at 2.0% halothane.
 Many MHS pedigrees investigated have been excluded from linkage to the RYR1 gene on the basis of a small number of recombinants; however, the linkage analysis reported here suggests that other recombinant families excluded from linkage to the RYR1 gene may actually demonstrate linkage as the number of members tested within the pedigrees increases.
 The high number of discordants observed using the standardized diagnostic cut-off points is likely to reflect the presence of a second MHS susceptibility locus in the pedigree.
Cytochrome P450 (P450)-dependent metabolism of all-trans-retinoic acid (atRA) is important for the expression of its biological activity.
 Because the human P450s involved in the formation of the principal atRA metabolites have been only partially identified, the purpose of this study was to identify the human P450s involved in atRA metabolism.
 The use of phenotyped human liver microsomes (n = 16) allowed the identification of the following P450s: 2B6, 2C8, 3A4/5, and 2A6 were involved in the formation of 4-OH-RA and 4-oxo-RA; 2B6, 2C8, and 2A6 correlated with the formation of 18-OH-RA; and 2A6, 2B6, and 3A4/5 activities correlated with 5, 6-epoxy-RA formation (30-min incubation, 10 microM atRA, HPLC separation, UV detection 340 nm).
 The use of 15 cDNA-expressed human P450s from lymphoblast microsomes, showed the formation of 4-OH-RA by CYP3A7 &gt; CYP3A5 &gt; CYP2C18 &gt; CYP2C8 &gt; CYP3A4 &gt; CYP2C9, whereas the 18-OH-RA formation involved CYPs 4A11 &gt; 3A7 &gt; 1A1 &gt; 2C9 &gt; 2C8 &gt; 3A5 &gt; 3A4 &gt;2C18.
 Kinetic studies identified 3A7 as the most active P450 in the formation of three of the metabolites: for 4-OH-retinoic acid, 3A7 showed a V(max)/K(m) of 127.7, followed by 3A5 (V(max)/K(m) = 25.6), 2C8 (V(max)/K(m) = 24.5), 2C18 (V(max)/K(m) = 15.8), 3A4 (V(max)/K(m) = 5.7), 1A1 (V(max)/K(m) = 5.0), and 4A11 (V(max)/K(m) = 1.9); for 4-oxo-RA, 3A7 showed a V(max)/K(m) of 13.4, followed by a 10-fold lower activity for both 2C18 and 4A11 (V(max)/K(m) = 1.2); and for 18-OH-RA, 3A7 showed a V(max)/K(m) of 10.5 compared with a V(max)/K(m) of 2.1 for 4A11 and 2.0 for 2C8.
 5,6-Epoxy-RA was only detected at high substrate concentrations in this system (&gt;10 microM), and P450s 2C8, 2C9, and 1A1 were the most active in its formation.
 The use of embryonic kidney cells (293) stably transfected with human P450 cDNA confirmed the major involvement of P450s 3A7, 1A1, and 2C8 in the oxidation of atRA, and to a lesser extent, 1A2, 2C9, and 3A4.
 In conclusion, several human P450s involved in atRA metabolism have been identified, the expression of which was shown to direct atRA metabolism toward the formation of specific metabolites.
 The role of these human P450s in the biological and anticancer effects of atRA remains to be elucidated.
Identification of human cytochrome P450s involved in the formation of all-trans-retinoic acid principal metabolites.
A novel ryanodine receptor gene mutation causing both cores and rods in congenital myopathy.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Central core disease (CCD) and nemaline rod myopathy are generally considered two genetically and histologically distinct disorders.
 CCD is defined by the presence of well-demarcated round cores within most myofibers.
 Nemaline rod myopathy is distinguished by the presence of characteristic nemaline bodies within myofibers.
 The simultaneous occurrence of both cores and rods in the same muscle biopsy has been described, but no gene mutations have been reported yet for this condition.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To describe a family containing 16 affected individuals in six generations with an autosomal dominant congenital myopathy that shows clinical and histologic features of both CCD and nemaline myopathy, and to determine the genetic etiology and protein composition of the cores/rods in this family.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;The results of linkage analyses excluded involvement of the two autosomal dominant nemaline myopathy loci on chromosome 1, but were consistent with a localization of the disease gene at the CCD locus on chromosome 19q13.1 (ryanodine receptor).
 SSCP analysis and DNA sequencing identified a novel Thr4637Ala mutation in the transmembrane region of the ryanodine receptor protein.
 Immunofluorescence studies of patient muscle biopsies showed the central cores to stain for ryanodine receptor.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;These data suggest that the occurrence of nemaline bodies can be a secondary feature of CCD, and that genetic studies on previously reported core/rod families should be targeted to the ryanodine receptor locus.
 The results of the immunofluorescence studies suggest that the cores contain excess abnormal ryanodine receptor protein.
Functional interactions between BRCA1 and the checkpoint kinase ATR during genotoxic stress.
The BRCA1 gene encodes a tumor suppressor that is mutated in 50% of familial breast cancers.
 The BRCA1 protein has been implicated in the DNA damage response, as DNA damage induces the phosphorylation of BRCA1 and causes its recruitment into nuclear foci that contain DNA repair proteins.
 The ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) gene product controls overall BRCA1 phosphorylation in response to gamma-irradiation (IR).
 In this study, we show that BRCA1 phosphorylation is only partially ATM dependent in response to IR and ATM independent in response to treatment with UV light, or the DNA replication inhibitors hydroxyurea (HU) and aphidicolin (APH).
 We provide evidence that the kinase responsible for this phosphorylation is the ATM-related kinase, ATR.
 ATR phosphorylates BRCA1 on six Ser/Thr residues, including Ser 1423, in vitro.
 Increased expression of ATR enhanced the phosphorylation of BRCA1 on Ser 1423 following cellular exposure to HU or UV light, whereas doxycycline-induced expression of a kinase-inactive ATR mutant protein inhibited HU- or UV light-induced Ser 1423 phosphorylation in GM847 fibroblasts, and partially suppressed the phosphorylation of this site in response to IR.
 Thus, ATR, like ATM, controls BRCA1 phosphorylation in vivo.
 Although ATR isolated from DNA-damaged cells does not show enhanced kinase activity in vitro, we found that ATR responds to DNA damage and replication blocks by forming distinct nuclear foci at the sites of stalled replication forks.
 Furthermore, ATR nuclear foci overlap with the nuclear foci formed by BRCA1.
 The dramatic relocalization of ATR in response to DNA damage points to a possible mechanism for its ability to enhance the phosphorylation of substrates in response to DNA damage.
 Together, these results demonstrate that ATR and BRCA1 are components of the same genotoxic stress-responsive pathway, and that ATR directly phosphorylates BRCA1 in response to damaged DNA or stalled DNA replication.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia is an autosomal-dominant, inherited disease with a relatively early onset and a mortality rate of approximately 30% by the age of 30 years.
 Phenotypically, it is characterized by salvoes of bidirectional and polymorphic ventricular tachycardias in response to vigorous exercise, with no structural evidence of myocardial disease.
 We previously mapped the causative gene to chromosome 1q42-q43.
 In the present study, we demonstrate that patients with familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia have missense mutations in the cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor type 2 [RyR2]).
&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;In 3 large families studied, 3 different RyR2 mutations (P2328S, Q4201R, V4653F) were detected and shown to fully cosegregate with the characteristic arrhythmic phenotype.
 These mutations were absent in the nonaffected family members and in 100 healthy controls.
 In addition to identifying 3 causative mutations, we identified a number of single nucleotide polymorphisms that span the genomic structure of RyR2 and will be useful for candidate-based association studies for other arrhythmic disorders.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Our data illustrate that mutations of the RyR2 gene cause at least one variety of inherited polymorphic tachycardia.
 These findings define a new entity of disorders of myocardial calcium signaling.
Mutations of the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) gene in familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
1,8-Cineole, the monoterpene cyclic ether known as eucalyptol, is one of the components in essential oils from Eucalyptus polybractea.
 We investigated the metabolism of 1,8-cineole by liver microsomes of rats and humans and by recombinant cytochrome P450 (P450 or CYP) enzymes in insect cells in which human P450 and NADPH-P450 reductase cDNAs had been introduced.
 1,8-Cineole was found to be oxidized at high rates to 2-exo-hydroxy-1,8-cineole by rat and human liver microsomal P450 enzymes.
 In rats, pregenolone-16alpha-carbonitrile (PCN) and phenobarbital induced the 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities by liver microsomes.
 Several lines of evidence suggested that CYP3A4 is a major enzyme involved in the oxidation of 1,8-cineole by human liver microsomes: (1), 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities by liver microsomes were inhibited very significantly by ketoconazole, a CYP3A inhibitor, and anti-CYP3A4 immunoglobulin G; (2), there was a good correlation between CYP3A4 contents and 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities in liver microsomes of eighteen human samples; and (3), of various recombinant human P450 enzymes examined, CYP3A4 had the highest activities for 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation; the rate catalyzed by CYP3A5 was about one-fourth of that catalyzed by CYP3A4.
 Kinetic analysis showed that K(m) and V(max) values for the oxidation of 1,8-cineole by liver microsomes of human sample HL-104 and rats treated with PCN were 50 microM and 91 nmol/min/nmol P450 and 20 microM and 12 nmol/min/nmol P450, respectively.
 The rates observed using human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP3A4 were very high among other CYP3A4 substrates reported so far.
 These results suggest that 1,8-cineole, a monoterpenoid present in nature, is one of the effective substrates for CYP3A enzymes in rat and human liver microsomes.
Oxidation of 1,8-cineole, the monoterpene cyclic ether originated from eucalyptus polybractea, by cytochrome P450 3A enzymes in rat and human liver microsomes.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia type 2 (ARVD2, OMIM 600996) is an autosomal dominant cardiomyopathy, characterized by partial degeneration of the myocardium of the right ventricle, electrical instability and sudden death.
 The disease locus was mapped to chromosome 1q42--q43.
 We report here on the physical mapping of the critical ARVD2 region, exclusion of two candidate genes (actinin 2 and nidogen), elucidation of the genomic structure of the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (RYR2) and identification of RYR2 mutations in four independent families.
 In myocardial cells, the RyR2 protein, activated by Ca(2+), induces the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol.
 RyR2 is the cardiac counterpart of RyR1, the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor, involved in malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility and in central core disease (CCD).
 The RyR2 mutations detected in the present study occurred in two highly conserved regions, strictly corresponding to those where mutations causing MH or CCD are clustered in the RYR1 gene.
 The detection of RyR2 mutations causing ARVD2, reported in this paper, opens the way to pre-symptomatic detection of carriers of the disease in childhood, thus enabling early monitoring and treatment.
Identification of mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene in families affected with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy type 2 (ARVD2).
Human cytochrome P450 3A4 is a major P450 enzyme in the liver and gastrointestinal tract.
 It plays important roles in the metabolism of a wide variety of drugs, some endogenous steroids, and harmful environmental contaminants.
 CYP3A4 exhibits a remarkable interindividual activity variation as high as 20-fold.
 To investigate whether the interindividual variation in CYP3A4 levels can be partly explained by genetic polymorphism, we analyzed DNA samples from 102 Chinese subjects by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis for novel point mutation in the CYP3A4 coding sequence and promoter region.
 Using PCR and directed sequencing method to establish the complete intron sequence of CYP3A4 from leukocytes, the complete genomic sequence from exon 1 through 13 of CYP3A4 was determined and published in the GenBank database (accession no.
 AF209389).
 CYP3A4-specific primers were designed accordingly.
 After PCR-single-strand conformation polymorphism and restriction fragment length polymorphism screening, we found three novel mutations; two are point mutations and one is insertion.
 The first variant allele (CYP3A4*4), an Ile118Val change, was found in 3 of 102 Chinese subjects.
 The next allele (CYP3A4*5), which causes a Pro218Arg amino acid change, was found in 2 of 102 subjects.
 We found an insertion in A(17776), designated as CYP3A4*6, which causes frame shift and an early stop codon in exon 9, in one heterozygous subject.
 We also investigated the CYP3A4 activity in these mutant subjects by measuring the morning spot urinary 6beta-hydroxycortisol to free cortisol ratio with the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method.
 When compared with healthy Chinese population data, the 6beta-hydroxycortisol to free cortisol ratio data suggested that these alleles (CYP3A4*4, CYP3A4*5, and CYP3A4*6) may decrease the CYP3A4 activity.
 Incidences of these mutations in Chinese subjects are rare.
 The prevalence of these point mutations in other ethnic groups and its effect on the metabolic activity of CYP3A4 remain to be further evaluated.
Novel mutations of CYP3A4 in Chinese.
Organization of the CYP1A cluster on human chromosome 15: implications for gene regulation.
The sequence and organization of the CYP1A cluster on human chromosome 15 was determined.
 A human genomic clone from a BAC library, containing both CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes, was isolated and sequenced.
 The results of Southern blot analysis using human genomic DNA were compatible with the structure of the BAC clone.
 The CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes are separated by a 23 kb segment that contains no other open reading frames.
 The CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes are in opposite orientation, revealing that the 5' flanking region is in common between the two genes.
 Analysis of the sequence obtained revealed the presence of xenobiotic response elements (XREs) previously reported for CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 and several additional consensus sequences for putative XREs.
 The presence of all the XREs upstream of both genes suggest that some of the regulatory elements known to control CYP1A1 gene expression, could also control CYP1A2 gene expression.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia is a genetic arrhythmogenic disorder characterized by stress-induced, bidirectional ventricular tachycardia that may degenerate into cardiac arrest and cause sudden death.
 The electrocardiographic pattern of this ventricular tachycardia closely resembles the arrhythmias associated with calcium overload and the delayed afterdepolarizations observed during digitalis toxicity.
 We speculated that a genetically determined abnormality of intracellular calcium handling might be the substrate of the disease; therefore, we considered the human cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (hRyR2) a likely candidate for this genetically transmitted arrhythmic disorder.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;Twelve patients presenting with typical catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in the absence of structural heart abnormalities were identified.
 DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes, and single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis was performed on polymerase chain reaction-amplified exons of the hRyR2 gene.
 Four single nucleotide substitutions leading to missense mutations were identified in 4 probands affected by the disease.
 Genetic analysis of the asymptomatic parents revealed that 3 probands carried de novo mutations.
 In 1 case, the identical twin of the proband died suddenly after having suffered syncopal episodes.
 The fourth mutation was identified in the proband, in 4 clinically affected family members, and in none of 3 nonaffected family members in a kindred with 2 sudden deaths that occurred at 16 and 14 years, respectively, in the sisters of the proband.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;We demonstrated that, in agreement with our hypothesis, hRyR2 is a gene responsible for catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
Mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (hRyR2) underlie catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
Identification of a novel mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) in patients with malignant hyperthermia.
Genomic organization of the human CYP3A locus: identification of a new, inducible CYP3A gene.
Proteins encoded by the human CYP3A genes metabolize every second drug currently in use.
 The activity of CYP3A gene products in the general population is highly variable and may affect the efficacy and safety of drugs metabolized by these enzymes.
 The mechanisms underlying this variability are poorly understood, but they include gene induction, protein inhibition and unknown genetic polymorphisms.
 To better understand the regulation of CYP3A expression and to provide a basis for a screen of genetic polymorphisms, we determined and analysed the sequence of the human CYP3A locus.
 The 231 kb locus sequence contains the three CYP3A genes described previously (CYP3A4, CYP3A5 and CYP3A7), three pseudogenes as well as a novel CYP3A gene termed CYP3A43.
 The gene encodes a putative protein with between 71.5% and 75.8% identity to the other CYP3A proteins.
 The highest expression level of CYP3A43 mRNA is observed in the prostate, an organ with extensive steroid metabolism.
 CYP3A43 is also expressed in several other tissues including liver, where it can be induced by rifampicin.
 CYP3A43 transcripts undergo extensive splicing.
 The identification of a new member of the CYP3A family and the characterization of the full CYP3A locus will aid efforts to identify the genetic variants underlying its variable expression.
 This, in turn, will lead to a better optimization of therapies involving the numerous substrates of CYP3A proteins.
Five novel natural allelic variants-951A-&gt;C, 1042G-&gt;A (D348N), 1156A-&gt;T (I386F), 1217G-&gt;A (C406Y) and 1291C-&gt;T (C431Y)-of the human CYP1A2 gene in a French Caucasian population.
Cloning of a novel phosphatidylinositol kinase-related kinase: characterization of the human SMG-1 RNA surveillance protein.
We have cloned and characterized a new member of the phosphatidylinositol kinase (PIK)-related kinase family.
 This gene, which we term human SMG-1 (hSMG-1), is orthologous to Caenorhabditis elegans SMG-1, a protein that functions in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD).
 cDNA sequencing revealed that hSMG-1 encodes a protein of 3031 amino acids containing a conserved kinase domain, a C-terminal domain unique to the PIK-related kinases and an FKBP12-rapamycin binding-like domain similar to that found in the PIK-related kinase mTOR.
 Immunopurified FLAG-tagged hSMG-1 exhibits protein kinase activity as measured by autophosphorylation and phosphorylation of the generic PIK-related kinase substrate PHAS-1.
 hSMG-1 kinase activity is inhibited by high nanomolar concentrations of wortmannin (IC(50) = 105 nm) but is not inhibited by a FKBP12-rapamycin complex.
 Mutation of conserved residues within the kinase domain of hSMG-1 abolishes both autophosphorylation and substrate phosphorylation, demonstrating that hSMG-1 exhibits intrinsic protein kinase activity.
 hSMG-1 phosphorylates purified hUpf1 protein, a phosphoprotein that plays a critical role in NMD, at sites that are also phosphorylated in whole cells.
 Based on these data, we conclude that hSMG-1 is the human orthologue to C.
 elegans SMG-1.
 Our data indicate that hSMG-1 may function in NMD by directly phosphorylating hUpf1 protein at physiologically relevant sites.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an anesthetic-drug-induced, life-threatening hypermetabolic syndrome caused by abnormal calcium regulation in skeletal muscle.
 Often inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, MH has linkage to 30 different mutations in the RYR1 gene, which encodes a calcium-release-channel protein found in the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane in skeletal muscle.
 All published RYR1 mutations exclusively represent single-nucleotide changes.
 The present report documents, in exon 44 of RYR1 in two unrelated, MH-susceptible families, a 3-bp deletion that results in deletion of a conserved glutamic acid at position 2347.
 This is the first deletion, in RYR1, found to be associated with MH susceptibility.
 MH susceptibility was confirmed among some family members by in vitro diagnostic pharmacological contracture testing of biopsied skeletal muscle.
 Although a single-amino-acid deletion appears to be a subtle change in the protein, the deletion of Glu2347 from RYR1 produces an unusually large electrically evoked contraction tension in MH-positive individuals, suggesting that this deletion produces an alteration in skeletal-muscle calcium regulation, even in the absence of pharmacological agents.
Single-amino-acid deletion in the RYR1 gene, associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and unusual contraction phenotype.
ATR/ATM-mediated phosphorylation of human Rad17 is required for genotoxic stress responses.
Genotoxic stress triggers the activation of checkpoints that delay cell-cycle progression to allow for DNA repair.
 Studies in fission yeast implicate members of the Rad family of checkpoint proteins, which includes Rad17, Rad1, Rad9 and Hus1, as key early-response elements during the activation of both the DNA damage and replication checkpoints.
 Here we demonstrate a direct regulatory linkage between the human Rad17 homologue (hRad17) and the checkpoint kinases, ATM and ATR.
 Treatment of human cells with genotoxic agents induced ATM/ATR-dependent phosphorylation of hRad17 at Ser 635 and Ser 645.
 Overexpression of a hRad17 mutant (hRad17AA) bearing Ala substitutions at both phosphorylation sites abrogated the DNA-damage-induced G2 checkpoint, and sensitized human fibroblasts to genotoxic stress.
 In contrast to wild-type hRad17, the hRad17AA mutant showed no ionizing-radiation-inducible association with hRad1, a component of the hRad1-hRad9-hHus1 checkpoint complex.
 These findings demonstrate that ATR/ATM-dependent phosphorylation of hRad17 is a critical early event during checkpoint signalling in DNA-damaged cells.
Evidence for alternate splicing within the mRNA transcript encoding the DNA damage response kinase ATR.
Proper cellular response to genotoxic insult often requires the activity of one or more members of a family of high-molecular weight protein kinases referred to as phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PIK)-like proteins.
 While catalytic activity is an indispensable part of PIK-like protein function, little is currently known about factors that control their activity and/or functions.
 This deficiency stems, in large part, from our lack of knowledge concerning functionally significant subdomains within the large non-catalytic domain of these proteins.
 We have determined that the transcript encoding the PIK-like protein ATR undergoes alternate splicing within the region of the mRNA encoding its non-catalytic domain.
 This conclusion is based on the sequencing of a human expressed sequence tag clone encoding a portion of the ATR cDNA, and is supported by the results of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays conducted on total and polyA+ RNA, as well as sequencing of cloned RT-PCR products.
 Cloning and sequencing of a segment of human genomic DNA indicated that this event arises from splicing of a single 192 bp exon within the ATR gene.
 Analysis of several human tissues indicated that alternate ATR transcripts are differentially expressed, suggesting that this region of the ATR protein may be of functional importance.
Identification and functional characterization of eight CYP3A4 protein variants.
The genetic component of the inter-individual variability in CYP3A4 activity has been estimated to be between 60% and 90%, but the underlying genetic factors remain largely unknown.
 A study of 213 Middle and Western European DNA samples resulted in the identification of 18 new CYP3A4 variants, including eight protein variants.
 A total of 7.5% of the population studied was found to be heterozygous for one of these variants.
 In a bacterial heterologous expression system, two mutants, R130Q and P416L, did not result in detectable P450 holoprotein.
 One mutant, T363M, expressed at significantly lower levels than wild-type CYP3A4.
 G56D, V170I, D174H and M445T were not significantly different when compared with wild-type CYP3A4 in expression or steroid hydroxylase activity.
 L373F displayed a significantly altered testosterone metabolite profile and a four-fold increase in the Km value for 1'-OH midazolam formation.
 The results suggest a limited contribution of CYP3A4 protein variants to the inter-individual variability of CYP3A4 activity in Caucasians.
 Some variants may, however, play a role in the atypical response to drugs or altered sensitivity to carcinogens.
Identification and functional characterization of a novel ryanodine receptor mutation causing malignant hyperthermia in North American and South American families.
Malignant hyperthermia is a pharmacogenetic disorder associated with mutations in Ca(2+) regulatory proteins.
 It manifests as a hypermetabolic crisis triggered by commonly used anesthetics.
 Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility is a dominantly inherited predisposition to malignant hyperthermia that can be diagnosed by using caffeine/halothane contracture tests.
 In a multigenerational North American family with a severe form of malignant hyperthermia that has caused four deaths, a novel RYR1 A2350T missense mutation was identified in all individuals testing positive for malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
 The same A2350T mutation was identified in an Argentinean family with two known fatal MH reactions.
 Functional analysis in HEK-293 cells revealed an altered Ca(2+) dependence and increased caffeine sensitivity of the expressed mutant protein thus confirming the pathogenic potential of the RYR1 A2350T mutation.
Human SMG-1, a novel phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinase, associates with components of the mRNA surveillance complex and is involved in the regulation of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a conserved surveillance mechanism that eliminates imperfect mRNAs that contain premature translation termination codons (PTCs) and code for nonfunctional or potentially harmful polypeptides.
 We show that a novel phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinase, hSMG-1, is a human ortholog of a product of Caenorhabditis elegans smg-1, one of seven smg genes involved in NMD.
 hSMG-1 phosphorylates hUPF1/SMG-2 in vivo and in vitro at specific serine residues in SQ motifs.
 hSMG-1 can associate with hUPF1/SMG-2 and other components of the surveillance complex.
 In particular, overexpression of a kinase-deficient point mutant of hSMG-1, hSMG-1-DA, results in a marked suppression of the PTC-dependent beta-globin mRNA degradation; whereas that of wild-type hSMG-1 enhances it.
 We also show that inhibitors of hSMG-1 induce the accumulation of truncated p53 proteins in human cancer cell lines with p53 PTC mutation.
 Taken together, we conclude that hSMG-1 plays a critical role in NMD through the direct phosphorylation of hUPF1/SMG-2 in the evolutionally conserved mRNA surveillance complex.
Role of human cytochrome P450 1A1, 1A2, 1B1, and 3A4 in the 2-, 4-, and 16alpha-hydroxylation of 17beta-estradiol.
The steady-state kinetics and specific activity of 2-, 4-, and 16alpha-hydroxylation of 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) were evaluated for human cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1, 1A2, 1B1, and 3A4 enzymes, using complementary DNA-expressed CYP isoforms.
 CYP1A2 showed the highest 2-hydroxylation activity, followed by CYP1A1, 1B1, and 3A4.
 CYP1B1 had the highest 4-hydroxylation activity, followed by CYP1A2, 1A1, and 3A4.
 The 16alpha-hydroxylation reaction was catalyzed mainly by CYP1A2 and, to a similar, slightly lower extent, CYP3A4 and 1A1, with a lesser contribution by CYP1B1.
 The E(2) 2-, 4-, and 16alpha-hydroxylation activities of human liver microsomes were 1.3 +/- 0.3, 0.5 +/- 0.06, and 0.3 +/-0.05 nmol metabolite/min/nmol P450, respectively.
 The contribution of CYP1A1 and 1B1 (mainly extrahepatic) to the E(2) hydroxylation reactions, relative to CYP1A2 and 3A4 (predominantly hepatic), may be relevant to understanding the process of hormonal carcinogenesis both in liver and in extrahepatic tissues.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a disorder of skeletal muscle manifested as a life-threatening hypermetabolic crisis in susceptible individuals after exposure to inhalational anesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants.
 Mutations in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) are considered a common cause of the disorder, and, to date, more than 20 RYR1 mutations have been reported in European and Canadian families.
 Some studies suggest that differences may exist in the frequencies and distribution of mutations in the RYR1 gene between European and North American MH families the frequency and distribution of mutations in the RYR1 gene.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Skeletal muscle samples from 73 unrelated individuals diagnosed as MH susceptible according to the North American MH caffeine-halothane contracture test were studied.
 Genomic DNA of MH-susceptible patients was investigated by polymerase chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism, single-strand conformation polymorphism, and sequencing analysis.
 The majority of known RYR1 mutations were analyzed using the restriction fragment length polymorphism method, whereas new mutations were searched by single-strand conformation polymorphism in exons 12, 15, 39, 40, 44, 45, and 46 of the gene.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Seven known RYR1 mutations (Arg163Cys, Gly248Arg, Arg614Cys, Val2168Met, Thr2206Met, Gly2434Arg, and Arg2454His) were detected at frequencies of 2.7, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4, 5.5, and 4.1%, respectively.
 In addition, three novel amino acid substitutions (Val2214Ile, Ala2367Thr, and Asp2431Asn) were detected at frequency of 1.4% each.
 These 10 mutations account for 21.9% of the North American MH-susceptible population.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;Three novel candidate mutations in the RYR1 gene were identified in these MH patients.
 The frequency and distribution of RYR1 mutations observed in this North American MH population was markedly different from that previously identified in Europe.
 Larger-scale studies are necessary to clarify the type and frequency of mutations in RYR1 associated with MH in North American families.
North American malignant hyperthermia population: screening of the ryanodine receptor gene and identification of novel mutations.
H2AX, a member of the histone H2A family, is rapidly phosphorylated in response to ionizing radiation.
 This phosphorylation, at an evolutionary conserved C-terminal phosphatidylinositol 3-OH-kinase-related kinase (PI3KK) motif, is thought to be critical for recognition and repair of DNA double strand breaks.
 Here we report that inhibition of DNA replication by hydroxyurea or ultraviolet irradiation also induces phosphorylation and foci formation of H2AX.
 These phospho-H2AX foci colocalize with proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), BRCA1, and 53BP1 at the arrested replication fork in S phase cells.
 This response is ATR-dependent but does not require ATM or Hus1.
 Our findings suggest that, in addition to its role in the recognition and repair of double strand breaks, H2AX also participates in the surveillance of DNA replication.
Histone H2AX is phosphorylated in an ATR-dependent manner in response to replicational stress.
1.
 Oxidation of 1,4-cineole, a monoterpene cyclic ether, was studied in rat and human liver microsomes and recombinant cytochrome P450 (P450 or CYP) enzymes expressed in insect cells in which human P450 and NADPH-P450 reductase cDNAs have been introduced.
 On analysis with gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, 2-exo-hydroxy-1,4-cineole was identified as a principal oxidation product of 1,4-cineole catalysed by rat and human P450 enzymes.
 2.
 CYP3A4 was a major enzyme involved in the 2-hydroxylation of 1,4-cineole by human liver microsomes, based on the following lines of evidence.
 First, 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities catalysed by human liver microsomes were inhibited by ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of CYP3A activities, and an anti-CYP3A4 antibody.
 Second, there was a good correlation beteeen CYP3A4 contents and 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities in liver microsomes of eighteen human samples examined.
 Finally, of 10 recombinant human P450 enzymes examined, CYP3A4 had the highest activity for 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation.
 3.
 Liver microsomal 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities were induced in rat by pregnenolone 16alpha-carbonitrile and dexamethasone and extensively inhibited by ketoconazole, indicative of the possible roles of CYP3A enzymes in this reaction.
 4.
 Kinetic analysis showed that Vmax/Km for 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation catalysed by liver microsomes was higher in a human sample HL-104 (4.6 microM(-1) min(-1)) than those of rat treated with pregnenolone 16alpha-carbonitrile (0.49 microM(-1) min(-1)) and dexamethasone (0.36 microM(-1) min(-1)).
 5.
 1,8-Cineole, a structurally related monoterpene previously shown to be catalysed by CYP3A enzymes, inhibited 1,4-cineole 2-hydroxylation catalysed by human liver microsomes, whereas 1,4-cineole did not inhibit 1,8-cineole 2-hydroxylation activities.
 Both compounds caused inhibition of testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation by human liver microsomes, the former compound being more inhibitory than the latter.
 6.
 These results suggest that 1,4-cineole and 1,8-cineole, two plant essential oils present in Citrus medica L.
 var.
 acida and Eucalyptus polybractea, respectively, are converted to 2-hydroxylated products by CYP3A enzymes in rat and human liver microsomes.
 It is unknown at present whether the 2-hydroxylation products of these compounds are more active biologically than the parent compound.
Roles of cytochrome P450 3A enzymes in the 2-hydroxylation of 1,4-cineole, a monoterpene cyclic ether, by rat and human liver microsomes.
Central core disease (CCD) is an autosomal dominant congenital myopathy.
 Diagnosis is based on the presence of cores in skeletal muscles.
 CCD has been linked to the gene encoding the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) and is considered to be an allelic disease of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
 However, the report of a recessive form of transmission together with a variable clinical presentation has raised the question of the genetic heterogeneity of the disease.
 Analyzing a panel of 34 families exclusively recruited on the basis of both clinically and morphologically expressed CCD, 12 different mutations of the C-terminal domain of RYR1 have been identified in 16 unrelated families.
 Morphological analysis of the patients' muscles showed different aspects of cores, all of them associated with mutations in the C-terminal region of RYR1.
 Furthermore, we characterized the presence of neomutations in the RyR1 gene in four families.
 This indicates that neomutations into the RyR1 gene are not a rare event and must be taken into account for genetic studies of families that present with congenital myopathies type 'central core disease'.
 Three mutations led to the deletion in frame of amino acids.
 This is the first report of amino acid deletions in RYR1 associated with CCD.
 According to a four-transmembrane domain model, the mutations concentrated mostly in the myoplasmic and luminal loops linking, respectively, transmembrane domains T1 and T2 or T3 and T4 of RYR1.
Familial and sporadic forms of central core disease are associated with mutations in the C-terminal domain of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor.
CYP3A4 is the most abundant isoform of cytochrome P450 (CYP) in adult human liver.
 It metabolizes numerous clinically, physiologically, and toxicologically important compounds.
 The expression of CYP3A4 varies 40-fold in individual human livers, and metabolism of CYP3A4 substrates varies at least 10-fold in vivo.
 Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in CYP3A4 were identified by direct sequencing of genomic DNA in 72 individuals from three different ethnic groups, including Caucasians, Blacks (African-Americans and African pygmies), and Asians.
 A total of 28 SNPs were identified, including five which produced coding changes M445T (CYP3A4*3), R162Q (CYP3A4*15), F189S (CYP3A4*17), L293P (CYP3A4*18), and P467S (CYP3A4*19).
 The latter four represent new alleic variants.
 Racial variability was observed for the frequency of individual SNPs.
 CYP3A R162Q was identified only in Black populations with an allelic frequency of 4%.
 CYP3A4 F189S and CYP3A4 M445T were identified in Caucasians with allelic frequencies 2% and 4%, respectively.
 L293P and P467S were only observed in Asians at allelic frequencies of 2%.
 The cDNAs for the F189S, L293P, M445T, and P467S mutant alleles were constructed by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in an Escherichia coli expression system.
 Testosterone and the insecticide chlorpyrifos were used to assess the catalytic activities of the most common CYP3A4 allele (CYP3A4*1) and its allelic variants.
 CYP3A4 F189S exhibited lower turnover numbers for testosterone and chlorpyrifos, while CYP3A4 L293P had higher turnover numbers for both substrates.
 The turnover numbers of the CYP3A4 M445T and P467S alleles to metabolize these compounds were not significantly different from those of wild-type CYP3A4.
Identification of variants of CYP3A4 and characterization of their abilities to metabolize testosterone and chlorpyrifos.
ATR and ATRIP: partners in checkpoint signaling.
The checkpoint kinases ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) and ATR (ATM and Rad3 related) transduce genomic stress signals to halt cell cycle progression and promote DNA repair.
 We report the identification of an ATR-interacting protein (ATRIP) that is phosphorylated by ATR, regulates ATR expression, and is an essential component of the DNA damage checkpoint pathway.
 ATR and ATRIP both localize to intranuclear foci after DNA damage or inhibition of replication.
 Deletion of ATR mediated by the Cre recombinase caused the loss of ATR and ATRIP expression, loss of DNA damage checkpoint responses, and cell death.
 Therefore, ATR is essential for the viability of human somatic cells.
 Small interfering RNA directed against ATRIP caused the loss of both ATRIP and ATR expression and the loss of checkpoint responses to DNA damage.
 Thus, ATRIP and ATR are mutually dependent partners in cell cycle checkpoint signaling pathways.
Accumulated recent evidence is indicating that alternative splicing represents a generalized process that increases the complexity of human gene expression.
 Here we show that mRNA production may not necessarily be limited to single genes, as human liver also has the potential to produce a variety of hybrid cytochrome P450 3A mRNA molecules.
 The four known cytochrome P450 3A genes in humans, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP3A7, and CYP3A43, share a high degree of similarity, consist of 13 exons with conserved exon-intron boundaries, and form a cluster on chromosome 7.
 The chimeric CYP3A mRNA molecules described herein are characterized by CYP3A43 exon 1 joined at canonical splice sites to distinct sets of CYP3A4 or CYP3A5 exons.
 Because the CYP3A43 gene is in a head-to-head orientation with the CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 genes, bypassing transcriptional termination can not account for the formation of hybrid CYP3A mRNAs.
 Thus, the mechanism generating these molecules has to be an RNA processing event that joins exons of independent pre-mRNA molecules, i.e.
 trans-splicing.
 Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, the ratio of one CYP3A43/3A4 intergenic combination was estimated to be approximately 0.15% that of the CYP3A43 mRNAs.
 Moreover, trans-splicing has been found not to interfere with polyadenylation.
 Heterologous expression of the chimeric species composed of CYP3A43 exon 1 joined to exons 2-13 of CYP3A4 revealed catalytic activity toward testosterone.
Intergenic mRNA molecules resulting from trans-splicing.
Identification of four novel mutations in the C-terminal membrane spanning domain of the ryanodine receptor 1: association with central core disease and alteration of calcium homeostasis.
The skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1; OMIM 180901) on chromosome 19q13.1 encodes the skeletal muscle calcium release channel.
 To date, more than 25 missense mutations have been identified in RYR1 and are associated with central core disease (CCD; OMIM 117000) and/or the malignant hyperthermia susceptibility phenotype (MHS1; OMIM 145600).
 The majority of RYR1 mutations are clustered in the N-terminal hydrophilic domain of the protein.
 Only four mutations have been identified so far in the highly conserved C-terminal region encoding the luminal/transmembrane domain of the protein which forms the ion pore.
 Three of these mutations have been found to segregate with pure or mixed forms of CCD.
 We have screened the C-terminal domain of the RYR1 gene for mutations in 50 European patients, diagnosed clinically and/or histologically as having CCD.
 We have identified five missense mutations (four of them novel) in 13 index patients.
 The mutations cluster in exons 101 and 102 and replace amino acids which are conserved in all known vertebrate RYR genes.
 In order to study the functional effect of these mutations, we have immortalized B-lymphocytes from some of the patients and studied their [Ca(2+)](i) homeostasis.
 We show that lymphoblasts carrying the newly identified RYR1 mutations exhibit: (i) a release of calcium from intracellular stores in the absence of any pharmacological activators of RYR; (ii) significantly smaller thapsigargin-sensitive intracellular calcium stores, compared to lymphoblasts from control individuals; and (iii) a normal sensitivity of the calcium release to the RYR inhibitor dantrolene.
 Our data suggest the C-terminal domain of RYR1 as a hot spot for mutations leading to the CCD phenotype.
 If the functional alterations of mutated RYR channels observed in lymphoblastoid cells are also present in skeletal muscles this could explain the predominant symptom of CCD, i.e.
 chronic muscle weakness.
 Finally, the study of calcium homeostasis in lymphoblastoid cells naturally expressing RYR1 mutations offers a novel non-invasive approach to gain insights into the pathogenesis of MH and CCD.
Cardiac excitation-contraction coupling.
Of the ions involved in the intricate workings of the heart, calcium is considered perhaps the most important.
 It is crucial to the very process that enables the chambers of the heart to contract and relax, a process called excitation-contraction coupling.
 It is important to understand in quantitative detail exactly how calcium is moved around the various organelles of the myocyte in order to bring about excitation-contraction coupling if we are to understand the basic physiology of heart function.
 Furthermore, spatial microdomains within the cell are important in localizing the molecular players that orchestrate cardiac function.
Hypoxia links ATR and p53 through replication arrest.
Previous studies have demonstrated that phosphorylation of human p53 on serine 15 contributes to protein stabilization after DNA damage and that this is mediated by the ATM family of kinases.
 However, cellular exposure to hypoxia does not induce any detectable level of DNA lesions compared to ionizing radiation, and the oxygen dependency of p53 protein accumulation differs from that of HIF-1, the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor.
 Here we show that, under severe hypoxic conditions, p53 protein accumulates only in S phase and this accumulation correlates with replication arrest.
 Inhibition of ATR kinase activity substantially reduces hypoxia-induced phosphorylation of p53 protein on serine 15 as well as p53 protein accumulation.
 Thus, hypoxia-induced cell growth arrest is tightly linked to an ATR-signaling pathway that is required for p53 modification and accumulation.
 These studies indicate that the ATR kinase plays an important role during tumor development in responding to hypoxia-induced replication arrest, and hypoxic conditions could select for the loss of key components of ATR-dependent checkpoint controls.
Common allelic variants of cytochrome P4503A4 and their prevalence in different populations.
Marked interindividual variability in expression of CYP3A4 influences the disposition of many endo- and xenobiotics, including the metabolism of steroids, environmental toxins and therapeutically useful drugs.
 The present study was designed to determine the genetic basis of CYP3A4 variability.
 We analysed DNA from 82 individuals with known CYP3A4 phenotype including 53 Caucasians and 21 African-American liver donors, seven individuals who were outliers in CYP3A4 metabolism and five individuals in a family of a poor nifedipine metabolizer.
 In addition, we analysed DNA from the eight person DNA Polymorphism Discovery Resource subset (Coriell Institute) and 89 individuals representing nine ethnic groups.
 Five non-synonymous mutations in the coding region of CYP3A4 were observed.
 CYP3A4*14 (T44C) in exon 1 resulted in an L15P change; CYP3A4*15 (G14387A) in exon 6 resulted in a R162Q substitution; CYP3A4*10 (G14422C) in exon 6 resulted in a D174H substitution; CYP3A4*16 (C15721G) in exon 7 resulted in a T185S amino acid substitution; and CYP3A4*12 (C22002T) in exon 11 resulted in a L373F change in the CYP3A4 protein.
 An additional six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 5'-UTR, 13 SNPs in the introns and three SNPs in the 3'-UTR were observed.
 Extensive population differences were observed in the frequencies of various CYP3A4 alleles.
 None of the 28 CYP3A4 SNPs identified in CYP3A4 phenotyped persons (most individuals being heterozygous for any CYP3A4 variant) was associated with low hepatic CYP3A4 protein expression or low CYP3A4 activity in vivo.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetical complication of general anesthesia resulting from abnormal Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR) via the type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1) in skeletal muscles.
 In this study, we analyzed the genomic DNAs prepared for determination of all the 106 exons of the RyR1 gene from blood samples donated by two MH patients with extremely high CICR rates in their biopsied skeletal muscles and a clear history of MH incidence.
 Two novel point mutations were found in the exons 96 and 101 with alterations in the coded amino acids within the C-terminal channel region, i.e., Pro4668 to Ser and Leu4838 to Val.
 The latter mutation was found in both MH patients.
 Rabbit RyR1 channels carrying corresponding mutations were expressed in CHO cells for functional assay.
 It was found that the L to V but not the P to S mutation of the RyR1 resulted in enhanced Ca2+ release activity.
 These results indicate that the L4838V mutation is responsible for the MH incidence.
 The L4838V mutation is unique because it is the mutation first found within a hydrophobic transmembrane segment of the channel region and should provide further information on the function of the RyR1 as well as for genetic diagnosis of MH.
Novel mutations in C-terminal channel region of the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia patients.
An unexpected finding of the human genome was the large fraction of the genome organized as blocks of interspersed duplicated sequence.
 We provide a comparative and phylogenetic analysis of a highly duplicated region of 16p12.2, which is composed of at least four different segmental duplications spanning in excess of 160 kb.
 We contrast the dispersal of two different segmental duplications (LCR16a and LCR16u).
 LCR16a, a 20 kb low-copy repeat sequence A from chromosome 16, was shown previously to contain a rapidly evolving novel hominoid gene family (morpheus) that had expanded within the last 10 million years of great ape/human evolution.
 We compare the dispersal of this genomic segment with a second adjacent duplication called LCR16u.
 The duplication contains a second putative gene family (KIAA0220/SMG1) that is represented approximately eight times within the human genome.
 A high degree of sequence identity (approximately 98%) was observed among the various copies of LCR16u.
 Comparative analyses with Old World monkey species show that LCR16a and LCR16u originated from two distinct ancestral loci.
 Within the human genome, at least 70% of the LCR16u copies were duplicated in concert with the LCR16a duplication.
 In contrast, only 30% of the chimpanzee loci show an association between LCR16a and LCR16u duplications.
 The data suggest that the two copies of genomic sequence were brought together during the chimpanzee/human divergence and were subsequently duplicated as a larger cassette specifically within the human lineage.
 The evolutionary history of these two chromosome-specific duplications supports a model of rapid expansion and evolutionary turnover among the genomes of man and the great apes.
Divergent origins and concerted expansion of two segmental duplications on chromosome 16.
Preferential binding of ATR protein to UV-damaged DNA.
The ATR protein is a member of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-related kinase family and plays an important role in UV-induced DNA damage checkpoint response.
 Its role as a signal transducer in cell cycle checkpoint is well established, but it is currently unclear whether ATR functions as a damage sensor as well.
 Here we have purified the ATR protein and investigated its interaction with DNA by using biochemical analysis and electron microscopy.
 We find that ATR is a DNA-binding protein with higher affinity to UV-damaged than undamaged DNA.
 In addition, damaged DNA stimulates the kinase activity of ATR to a significantly higher level than undamaged DNA.
 Our data suggest that ATR may function as an initial sensor in the DNA damage checkpoint response.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;The ryanodine receptor of the skeletal muscle (RYR1) seems to be of outstanding importance in the pathogenesis of malignant hyperthermia (MH).
 It has been shown that point mutations in the RYR1 gene are strongly associated with the MH phenotype.
 A correctly determined phenotype is the basic prerequisite for adequate genetic MH screening.
 In this study we examined only those MH susceptible patients for the presence of potential RYR1 mutations who showed strong pathological muscle responses in the in vitro contracture test (IVCT).
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;A total of 56 MHS index patients who complied with the following IVCT criteria were included in the molecular genetic investigation: Contracture forces &gt; or =4 mN at a caffeine concentration of 2.0 mmol/l and &gt; or =8 mN at a halothane concentration of 0.44 mmol/l.
 DNA sequences of exons 2, 6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 39, 40, 45, 46, 102 of the RYR1 gene were analysed by the direct sequencing technique.
 Furthermore, if an MH mutation was identified in an index patient, all relatives were screened for their family specific RYR1 defect.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;In 39 index patients an RYR1 mutation was detected: Arg163Cys (n = 2), Asp166Asn (n = 1), Gly341Arg (n = 2), Arg401His (n = 2), Arg614Cys (n = 12), Asp2129Glu (n = 1),Vol2168Met (n = 1), Thr2206Met (n = 9), Ala2428Thr (n = 1), Gly2434Arg (n = 2), Arg2435His (n = 1), Arg2452Trp (n = 1), Arg2454His (n = 4).
 Three new RYR1 mutations were identified.
 We found a potential MH mutation in a further 130 relatives of the 39 index patients.
 Thirty-seven individuals were classified as MHS exclusively by molecular genetic techniques and did not have to undergo the IVCT.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The ascertained high rate of successful MH mutation screening (69.64%) is obviously associated with the more clearly defined MHS diagnosis in the IVCT.
 According to the EMHG guidelines for the molecular genetic detection of MH susceptibility, a positive MH disposition could be determined in numerous persons by a less invasive technique.
Mutation screening in the ryanodine receptor 1 gene (RYR1) in patients susceptible to malignant hyperthermia who show definite IVCT results: identification of three novel mutations.
Malignant hyperthermia associated with exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis or congenital abnormalities and a novel RYR1 mutation in New Zealand and Australian pedigrees.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is rarely associated with specific myopathies or musculoskeletal abnormalities.
 Three clinical investigations of MH associated with either non-specific myopathies or congenital disorders in three separate families are presented.
 Two of these cases also show evidence of exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis.
 In each case MH susceptibility was confirmed by in vitro contracture testing of quadriceps muscle.
 DNA sequence analysis of each kindred revealed the presence of a common novel mutation that results in an arginine401-cysteine substitution in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1).
 Haplotype analysis using chromosome 19q markers indicated that the three families are likely to be unrelated, providing confirmation that the MH/central core disease region 1 of RYR1 is a mutation hot spot.
Clinical and molecular characterization of patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (RyR2) underlie catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), an inherited arrhythmogenic disease occurring in the structurally intact heart.
 The proportion of patients with CPVT carrying RyR2 mutations is unknown, and the clinical features of RyR2-CPVT as compared with nongenotyped CPVT are undefined.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;Patients with documented polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias occurring during physical or emotional stress with a normal heart entered the study.
 The clinical phenotype of the 30 probands and of 118 family members was evaluated, and mutation screening on the RyR2 gene was performed.
 Arrhythmias documented in probands were: 14 of 30 bidirectional ventricular tachycardia, 12 of 30 polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, and 4 of 30 catecholaminergic idiopathic ventricular fibrillation; RyR2 mutations were identified in 14 of 30 probands (36% bidirectional ventricular tachycardia, 58% polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, 50% catecholaminergic idiopathic ventricular fibrillation) and in 9 family members (4 silent gene carriers).
 Genotype-phenotype analysis showed that patients with RyR2 CPVT have events at a younger age than do patients with nongenotyped CPVT and that male sex is a risk factor for syncope in RyR2-CPVT (relative risk=4.2).
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;CPVT is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease manifesting beyond pediatric age with a spectrum of polymorphic arrhythmias.
 beta-Blockers reduce arrhythmias, but in 30% of patients an implantable defibrillator may be required.
 Genetic analysis identifies two groups of patients: Patients with nongenotyped CPVT are predominantly women and become symptomatic later in life; patients with RyR2 CPVT become symptomatic earlier, and men are at higher risk of cardiac events.
 These data provide a rationale for prompt evaluation and treatment of young men with RyR2 mutations.
&lt;h4&gt;Objectives&lt;/h4&gt;We sought to establish the role of genetic screening for ryanodine receptor type 2 (RyR2) gene mutations in families with effort-induced polymorphic ventricular arrhythmia (PVA), syncope and juvenile sudden death.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;The RyR2 mutations have been associated with PVA, syncope and sudden death in response to physical or emotional stress.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;We studied 81 subjects (39 males and 42 females; mean age 31 +/-20 years) belonging to eight families with pathogenic RyR2 mutations.
 All subjects underwent screening for RyR2 mutations, electrocardiography (ECG), 24-h Holter monitoring, signal-averaged electrocardiography (SAECG), two-dimensional echocardiography and exercise stress testing.
 Electrophysiologic (EP) study was performed in nine patients.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Six different RyR2 mutations were found in eight families.
 Forty-three family members carried the gene mutation.
 Of these, 28 (65%) showed effort-induced arrhythmic symptoms or signs and one died suddenly during follow-up.
 Family history revealed 19 juvenile cases of sudden death during effort or emotion.
 In two families sharing the same mutation, no subject presented with PVA during the stress test; thus, sudden death and syncope were the only clinical manifestations.
 The 12-lead ECG was normal in all but two subjects, whereas five patients showed positive late potentials on the SAECG.
 In 17 (39.5%) of 43 subjects, the two-dimensional echocardiogram revealed localized kinetic abnormalities and mild structural alterations of the right ventricle.
 The EP study was not able to induce PVA.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The absence of symptoms and PVA on the stress test in more than one-third of carriers of RyR2 mutations, as well as the lack of PVA inducibility by the EP study, underlies the importance of genetic screening for the early diagnosis of asymptomatic carriers and prevention of sudden death.
Screening for ryanodine receptor type 2 mutations in families with effort-induced polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death: early diagnosis of asymptomatic carriers.
A recessive form of central core disease, transiently presenting as multi-minicore disease, is associated with a homozygous mutation in the ryanodine receptor type 1 gene.
Multi-minicore disease is an autosomal recessive congenital myopathy characterized by the presence of multiple, short-length core lesions (minicores) in both muscle fiber types.
 These lesions being nonspecific and the clinical phenotype being heterogeneous, multi-minicore disease boundaries remain unclear.
 To identify its genetic basis, we performed a genome-wide screening in a consanguineous Algerian family in which three children presented in infancy with moderate weakness predominant in axial muscles, pelvic girdle and hands, joint hyperlaxity (hand involvement phenotype), and multiple minicores.
 We mapped the disease to chromosome 19q13 in this family and, subsequently, in three additional families showing a similar phenotype, with a maximum LOD score of 5.19 for D19S570.
 This locus was excluded in 16 other multi-minicore disease families with predominantly axial weakness, scoliosis, and respiratory insufficiency ("classical" phenotype).
 In the Algerian family, we identified a novel homozygous missense mutation (P3527S) in the ryanodine receptor type 1 gene, a positional candidate gene responsible for the autosomal dominant congenital myopathy central core disease.
 New muscle biopsies from the three patients at adulthood demonstrated typical central core disease with rods; no cores were found in the healthy parents.
 This subgroup of families linked to 19q13 represents the first variant of central core disease with genetically proven recessive inheritance and transient presentation as multi-minicore disease.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant disorder that predisposes susceptible individuals to a potentially life-threatening crisis when exposed to commonly used anesthetics.
 Mutations in the skeletal muscle calcium release channel, ryanodine receptor (RYR1) are associated with MH in over 50% of affected families.
 Linkage analysis of the RYR1 gene region at 19q13 was performed in a large Brazilian family and a distinct disease co-segregating haplotype was revealed in the majority of members with diagnosis of MH.
 Subsequent sequencing of RYR1 mutational hot spots revealed a nucleotide substitution of C to T at position 7062, causing a novel amino acid change from Arg2355 to Cys associated with MH in the family.
 Haplotype analysis of the RYR1 gene area at 19q13 in the family with multiple MH members is an important tool in identification of genetic cause underlying this disease.
Novel skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor mutation in a large Brazilian family with malignant hyperthermia.
Autosomal recessive inheritance of RYR1 mutations in a congenital myopathy with cores.
Central core disease (CCD) is a congenital myopathy due to dominant mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1).
 The authors report three patients from two consanguineous families with symptoms of a congenital myopathy, cores on muscle biopsy, and confirmed linkage to the RYR1 locus.
 Molecular genetic studies in one family identified a V4849I homozygous missense mutation in the RYR1 gene.
 This report suggests a congenital myopathy associated with recessive RYR1 mutations.
Construction of expression-ready cDNA clones for KIAA genes: manual curation of 330 KIAA cDNA clones.
We have accumulated information on protein-coding sequences of uncharacterized human genes, which are known as KIAA genes, through cDNA sequencing.
 For comprehensive functional analysis of the KIAA genes, it is necessary to prepare a set of cDNA clones which direct the synthesis of functional KIAA gene products.
 However, since the KIAA cDNAs were derived from long mRNAs (&gt; 4 kb), it was not expected that all of them were full-length.
 Thus, as the first step toward preparing these clones, we evaluated the integrity of protein-coding sequences of KIAA cDNA clones through comparison with homologous protein entries in the public database.
 As a result, 1141 KIAA cDNAs had at least one homologous entry in the database, and 619 of them (54%) were found to be truncated at the 5' and/or 3' ends.
 In this study, 290 KIAA cDNA clones were tailored to be full-length or have considerably longer sequences than the original clones by isolating additional cDNA clones and/or connected parts of additional cDNAs or PCR products of the missing portion to the original cDNA clone.
 Consequently, 265, 8, and 17 predicted CDSs of KIAA cDNA clones were increased in the amino-, carboxy-, and both terminal sequences, respectively.
 In addition, 40 cDNA clones were modified to remove spurious interruption of protein-coding sequences.
 The total length of the resultant extensions at amino- and carboxy-terminals of KIAA gene products reached 97,000 and 7,216 amino acid residues, respectively, and various protein domains were found in these extended portions.
Mutations in the ryanodine receptor type 1 (RYR1) gene are associated with Malignant Hyperthermia (MH) and Central Core Disease (CCD).
 We report here on the molecular analysis of the RYR1 gene in Italian families referred as potential cases of MH or in patients with CCD or multicore/minicore myopathy.
 Of a total of 20 individuals with mutations in the RYR1 gene, 14 were part of a group of 47 MH susceptible (MHS) patients, 4 of 34 individuals diagnosed as MH equivocal (MHE), and 2 were patients diagnosed with minicore myopathy and CCD, respectively.
 Mutations were found to segregate with the MHS or MHE phenotype within the families of the probands.
 A discordance between phenotype and genotype was observed in a family where a mutation detected in an MHS proband was also found in the father who had been diagnosed MH normal (MHN) at the IVCT.
 In addition to known mutations, seven novel mutations were found, five of which occurred in exons encoding the C-terminal region of RYR1.
 These results indicate that the C-terminal region of RYR1 represents an additional hot spot for mutations in patients with MH, similar to what has been reported for patients with CCD.
Mutations in the RYR1 gene in Italian patients at risk for malignant hyperthermia: evidence for a cluster of novel mutations in the C-terminal region.
In Jurkat T cells, the type 3 ryanodine receptor (RyR) was knocked-down by stable integration of plasmid expressing type 3 ryanodine receptor antisense RNA.
 Stable integration of the antisense plasmid in individual clones was demonstrated by PCR of genomic DNA, expression of antisense RNA by reverse transcriptase PCR, and efficiently reduced expression of type 3 ryanodine receptor protein by Western blot.
 Selected clones were successfully used to analyze T cell receptor/CD3 complex-mediated Ca(2+) signaling.
 Reduced expression of the type 3 RyR resulted in (i) significantly decreased Ca(2+) signaling in the sustained phase and (ii) in permeabilized cells in a significantly impaired response toward cyclic ADP-ribose but not to d-myo-inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate.
 For the first time, the role of the type 3 RyR in sustained Ca(2+) signaling was directly visualized by confocal Ca(2+) imaging as a significant contribution to the number and the magnitude of subcellular Ca(2+) signals.
 These data suggest that the type 3 ryanodine receptor is essential in the sustained Ca(2+) response in T cells.
Knock-down of the type 3 ryanodine receptor impairs sustained Ca2+ signaling via the T cell receptor/CD3 complex.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS), an uncommon syndrome often inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, is characterized by a genetic and clinical heterogeneity.
 In this article, the authors described six pedigrees in which both parents of MHS patients were diagnosed with MHS by an diagnostic test.
 Haplotype and mutation analysis revealed that more than one MHS genetic trait was present in these families.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;A panel of 104 MHS families were investigated with a caffeine halothane contracture test on muscle biopsy specimens.
 When possible, blood creatine kinase concentrations of MHS patients were measured.
 Haplotyping studies were conducted with chromosome 19q13.2 polymorphic markers and mutations were searched for in patients' DNA.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;In six families, the diagnostic test and genetic studies demonstrated that both, apparently unrelated, parents of MHS patients were MHS.
 In three families, homozygous or compound heterozygous individuals for RYR1 mutations were characterized at a molecular level.
 In one family, a compound heterozygous patient harboring a RYR1 mutation and a CACNA1S mutation was identified.
 While patients with two mutated alleles did not show differences in their muscle response to halothane or caffeine, their creatinine kinase concentrations were significantly elevated compared with the heterozygous patients.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Based on genetic and diagnostic test data, more than one MHS allele associated with the MHS phenotype was evidenced in four families.
 These data should be considered in view of the use of genetics for the diagnosis of MHS and when reaching conclusions of genetic heterogeneity in MHS families.
 Taking into account the usual dominant mode of transmission of MHS and the size of the investigated population, the authors propose an evaluation of the incidence of the MHS in the general population based on genetic data.
Presence of two different genetic traits in malignant hyperthermia families: implication for genetic analysis, diagnosis, and incidence of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
ATR regulates fragile site stability.
Conditions that partially inhibit DNA replication induce expression of common fragile sites.
 These sites form gaps and breaks on metaphase chromosomes and are deleted and rearranged in many tumors.
 Yet, the mechanism of fragile site expression has been elusive.
 We demonstrate that the replication checkpoint kinase ATR, but not ATM, is critical for maintenance of fragile site stability.
 ATR deficiency results in fragile site expression with and without addition of replication inhibitors.
 Thus, we propose that fragile sites are unreplicated chromosomal regions resulting from stalled forks that escape the ATR replication checkpoint.
 These findings have important implications for understanding both the mechanism of fragile site instability and the consequences of stalled replication in mammalian cells.
Characterization of human Smg5/7a: a protein with similarities to Caenorhabditis elegans SMG5 and SMG7 that functions in the dephosphorylation of Upf1.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) in mammalian cells depends on phosphorylation of Upf1, an RNA-dependent ATPase and 5'-to-3' helicase.
 Upf1 phosphorylation is mediated by Smg1, a phosphoinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinase.
 Here, we describe a human protein, which we call hSmg5/7a, that manifests similarity to Caenorhabditis elegans NMD factors CeSMG5 and CeSMG7, as well as two Drosophila melanogaster proteins that are also similar to the C.
 elegans NMD factors.
 Results indicate that hSmg5/7a functions in the dephosphorylation of Upf1.
 Furthermore, hSmg5/7a copurifies with Upf1, Upf2, Upf3X, Smg1, and the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 2A.
 We also demonstrate that Upf2, another factor involved in NMD, is a phosphoprotein.
 However, hSmg5/7a plays no role in the dephosphorylation of Upf2.
 These data indicate that hSmg5/7a targets protein phosphatase 2A to Upf1 but not Upf2.
 Results of Western blotting reveal that hSmg5/7a is mostly cytoplasmic in HEK293T cells.
Principal mutation hotspot for central core disease and related myopathies in the C-terminal transmembrane region of the RYR1 gene.
The congenital myopathies are a group of disorders characterised by the predominance of specific histological features observed in biopsied muscle.
 Central core disease and nemaline myopathy are examples of congenital myopathies that have specific histological characteristics but significantly overlapping clinical pictures.
 Central core disease is an autosomal dominant disorder with variable penetrance which has been linked principally to the gene for the skeletal muscle calcium release channel (RYR1).
 Two recent reports have identified the 3' transmembrane domain of this gene as a common site for mutations.
 Two other studies have reported single families that have features of both central core disease and nemaline myopathy (core/rod disease) caused by mutations in RYR1.
 Screening of the 3' region (exons 93-105) of the RYR1 gene for mutations in 27 apparently unrelated patients with either central core disease or core/rod disease by single strand conformation polymorphism analysis and DNA sequencing identified three described and nine novel mutations in 15 patients.
Clinical and functional effects of a deletion in a COOH-terminal lumenal loop of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor.
We have identified a patient affected by a relatively severe form of central core disease (CCD), carrying a heterozygous deletion (amino acids 4863-4869) in the pore-forming region of the sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release channel.
 The functional effect of this deletion was investigated (i) in lymphoblastoid cells from the affected patient and her mother, who was also found to harbour the mutation and (ii) in HEK293 cells expressing recombinant mutant channels.
 Lymphoblastoid cells carrying the RYR1 deletion exhibit an 'unprompted' calcium release from intracellular stores, resulting in significantly smaller thapsigargin-sensitive intracellular Ca(2+) stores, compared with lymphoblastoid cells from control individuals.
 Blocking the RYR1 with dantrolene restored the intracellular calcium stores to levels similar to those found in control cells.
 Single channel and [(3)H]ryanodine binding measurements of heterologously expressed mutant channels revealed a reduced ion conductance and loss of ryanodine binding and regulation by Ca(2+).
 Heterologous expression of recombinant RYR1 peptides and analysis of their membrane topology demonstrate that the deleted amino acids are localized in the lumenal loop connecting membrane-spanning segments M8 and M10.
 We provide evidence that a deletion in the lumenal loop of RYR1 alters channel function and causes CCD.
A splicing mutation affecting expression of ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein (ATR) results in Seckel syndrome.
Seckel syndrome (OMIM 210600) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by intrauterine growth retardation, dwarfism, microcephaly and mental retardation.
 Clinically, Seckel syndrome shares features in common with disorders involving impaired DNA-damage responses, such as Nijmegen breakage syndrome (OMIM 251260) and LIG4 syndrome (OMIM 606593).
 We previously mapped a locus associated with Seckel syndrome to chromosome 3q22.1-q24 in two consanguineous Pakistani families.
 Further marker analysis in the families, including a recently born unaffected child with a recombination in the critical region, narrowed the region to an interval of 5 Mbp between markers D3S1316 and D3S1557 (145.29 Mbp and 150.37 Mbp).
 The gene encoding ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein (ATR) maps to this region.
 A fibroblast cell line derived from an affected individual displays a defective DNA damage response caused by impaired ATR function.
 We identified a synonymous mutation in affected individuals that alters ATR splicing.
 The mutation confers a phenotype including marked microcephaly (head circumference 12 s.d.
 below the mean) and dwarfism (5 s.d.
 below the mean).
 Our analysis shows that UV-induced ATR activation can occur in non-replicating cells following processing by nucleotide excision repair.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a fatal autosomal dominant pharmacogenetic disorder characterized by skeletal muscle hypertonicity that causes a sudden increase in body temperature after exposure to common anesthetic agents.
 The disease is genetically heterogeneous, with mutations in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) at 19q13.1 accounting for up to 80% of the cases.
 To date, at least 42 RYR1 mutations have been described that cause MH and/or central core disease.
 Because the RYR1 gene is huge, containing 106 exons, molecular tests have focused on the regions that are more frequently mutated.
 Thus the causative defect has been identified in only a fraction of families as linked to chromosome 19q, whereas in others it remains undetected.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;We used denaturing HPLC (DHPLC) to analyze the RYR1 gene.
 We set up conditions to scan the 27 exons to identify both known and unknown mutations in critical regions of the protein.
 For each exon, we analyzed members from 52 families with positive in vitro contracture test results, but without preliminary selection by linkage analysis.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;We identified seven different mutations in 11 MH families.
 Among them, three were novel MH alleles: Arg44Cys, Arg533Cys, and Val2117Leu.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;Because of its sensitivity and speed, DHPLC could be the method of choice for the detection of unknown mutations in the RYR1 gene.
Scanning for mutations of the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene by denaturing HPLC: detection of three novel malignant hyperthermia alleles.
A homozygous splicing mutation causing a depletion of skeletal muscle RYR1 is associated with multi-minicore disease congenital myopathy with ophthalmoplegia.
The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is an essential component of the calcium homeostasis of the skeletal muscle in mammals.
 Inactivation of the RYR1 gene in mice is lethal at birth.
 In humans only missense and in-frame mutations in the RYR1 gene have been associated so far with various muscle disorders including malignant hyperthermia, central core disease and the moderate form of multi-minicore disease (MmD).
 We identified a cryptic splicing mutation in the RYR1 gene that resulted in a 90% decrease of the normal RYR1 transcript in skeletal muscle.
 The 14646+2.99 kb A--&gt;G mutation was associated with the classical form of MmD with ophthalmoplegia, whose genetic basis was previously unknown.
 The mutation present at a homozygous level was responsible for a massive depletion of the RYR1 protein in skeletal muscle.
 The mutation was not expressed in lymphoblastoid cells, pointing toward a tissue specific splicing mechanism.
 This first report of an out-of-frame mutation that affects the amount of RYR1 raised the question of the amount of RYR1 needed for skeletal muscle function in humans.
Claspin is a newly identified protein that regulates Chk1 activation in Xenopus.
 In the present study we investigated the role of human Claspin in the DNA damage/replication checkpoint in mammalian cells.
 We observed that human Claspin is a cell cycle regulated protein that peaks at S/G2 phase.
 Claspin localizes in the nuclei, but it only associates with Chk1 following replication stress or other types of DNA damage.
 In addition, Claspin is phosphorylated in response to replication stress, and this phosphorylation appears to be required for its association with Chk1.
 Moreover, Claspin interacts with the checkpoint proteins ATR and Rad9.
 Given that both the ATR and Rad9-Rad1-Hus1 complexes are involved in Chk1 activation, it is possible that Claspin works as an adaptor molecule bringing these molecules together.
 Using small interfering RNA technology, we have shown that down-regulation of Claspin expression inhibits Chk1 activation in response to replication stress.
 More importantly, down-regulation of Claspin augments the premature chromatin condensation induced by hydroxyurea, inhibits the UV-induced reduction of DNA synthesis, and decreases cell survival.
 Taken together, these data imply a potentially critical role for Claspin in replication checkpoint control in mammalian cells.
Human claspin is required for replication checkpoint control.
Sensing DNA damage through ATRIP recognition of RPA-ssDNA complexes.
The function of the ATR (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated- and Rad3-related)-ATRIP (ATR-interacting protein) protein kinase complex is crucial for the cellular response to replication stress and DNA damage.
 Here, we show that replication protein A (RPA), a protein complex that associates with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), is required for the recruitment of ATR to sites of DNA damage and for ATR-mediated Chk1 activation in human cells.
 In vitro, RPA stimulates the binding of ATRIP to ssDNA.
 The binding of ATRIP to RPA-coated ssDNA enables the ATR-ATRIP complex to associate with DNA and stimulates phosphorylation of the Rad17 protein that is bound to DNA.
 Furthermore, Ddc2, the budding yeast homolog of ATRIP, is specifically recruited to double-strand DNA breaks in an RPA-dependent manner.
 A checkpoint-deficient mutant of RPA, rfa1-t11, is defective for recruiting Ddc2 to ssDNA both in vivo and in vitro.
 Our data suggest that RPA-coated ssDNA is the critical structure at sites of DNA damage that recruits the ATR-ATRIP complex and facilitates its recognition of substrates for phosphorylation and the initiation of checkpoint signaling.
ATR kinase activity regulates the intranuclear translocation of ATR and RPA following ionizing radiation.
Upon damage of DNA in eukaryotic cells, several repair and checkpoint proteins undergo a dramatic intranuclear relocalization, translocating to nuclear foci thought to represent sites of DNA damage and repair.
 Examples of such proteins include the checkpoint kinase ATR (ATM and Rad3-related) as well as replication protein A (RPA), a single-stranded DNA binding protein required in DNA replication and repair.
 Here, we used a microscopy-based approach to investigate whether the damage-induced translocation of RPA is an active process regulated by ATR.
 Our data show that in undamaged cells, ATR and RPA are uniformly distributed in the nucleus or localized to promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear bodies.
 In cells treated with ionizing radiation, both ATR and RPA translocate to punctate, abundant nuclear foci where they continue to colocalize.
 Surprisingly, an ATR mutant that lacks kinase activity fails to relocalize in response to DNA damage.
 Furthermore, this kinase-inactive mutant blocks the translocation of RPA in a cell cycle-dependent manner.
 These observations demonstrate that the kinase activity of ATR is essential for the irradiation-induced release of ATR and RPA from PML bodies and translocation of ATR and RPA to potential sites of DNA damage.
Characterization of the oxidative metabolites of 17beta-estradiol and estrone formed by 15 selectively expressed human cytochrome p450 isoforms.
We systematically characterized the oxidative metabolites of 17beta-estradiol and estrone formed by 15 human cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms.
 CYP1A1 had high activity for 17beta-estradiol 2-hydroxylation, followed by 15alpha-, 6alpha-, 4-, and 7alpha-hydroxylation.
 However, when estrone was the substrate, CYP1A1 formed more 4-hydroxyestrone than 15alpha- or 6alpha-hydroxyestrone, with 2-hydroxyestrone as the major metabolite.
 CYP1A2 had the highest activity for the 2-hydroxylation of both 17beta-estradiol and estrone, although it also had considerable activity for their 4-hydroxylation (9-13% of 2-hydroxylation).
 CYP1B1 mainly catalyzed the formation of catechol estrogens, with 4-hydroxyestrogens predominant.
 CYP2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, and 2D6 each showed a varying degree of low catalytic activity for estrogen 2-hydroxylation, whereas CYP2C18 and CYP2E1 did not show any detectable estrogen-hydroxylating activity.
 CYP3A4 had strong activity for the formation of 2-hydroxyestradiol, followed by 4-hydroxyestradiol and an unknown polar metabolite, and small amounts of 16alpha- and 16beta-hydroxyestrogens were also formed.
 The ratio of 4-to 2-hydroxylation of 17beta-estradiol or estrone with CYP3A4 was 0.22 or 0.51, respectively.
 CYP3A5 had similar catalytic activity for the formation of 2- and 4- hydroxyestrogens.
 Notably, CYP3A5 had an unusually high ratio of 4-to 2-hydroxylation of 17beta-estradiol or estrone (0.53 or 1.26, respectively).
 CYP3A4 and 3A5 also catalyzed the formation of nonpolar estrogen metabolite peaks (chromatographically less polar than estrone).
 CYP3A7 had a distinct catalytic activity for the 16alpha-hydroxylation of estrone, but not 17beta-estradiol.
 CYP4A11 had little catalytic activity for the metabolism of 17beta-estradiol and estrone.
 In conclusion, many human CYP isoforms are involved in the oxidative metabolism of 17beta-estradiol and estrone, with a varying degree of catalytic activity and distinct regioselectivity.
Detection of a novel ryanodine receptor subtype 1 mutation (R328W) in a malignant hyperthermia family by sequencing of a leukocyte transcript.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;To determine whether malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility in a Canadian pedigree is associated with a mutation in the ryanodine receptor subtype 1 (RYR1) gene, the complete RYR1 transcript obtained from the leukocytes of one MH-susceptible family member was sequenced, using a newly developed protocol.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;RNA was extracted from leukocytes and converted into complementary DNA.
 Overlapping fragments of RYR1 complementary DNA were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction and used for double-strand sequencing to find a single mutation likely to be causal of MH susceptibility.
 Inheritance of the mutation in the family was studied by restriction endonuclease analysis and/or sequencing of genomic DNA and compared to available caffeine halothane contracture test data.
 The mutation was introduced into rabbit RYR1 complementary DNA, the complementary DNA was expressed in human embryonic kidney line 293 cells, and Ca2+ release by the mutant Ca2+ release channel was measured following the addition of caffeine and halothane.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;A novel arginine 328 to tryptophan mutation in RYR1 was detected by direct sequencing of the RYR1 transcript from leukocytes of one MH-susceptible individual.
 A causal role for this mutation in MH is indicated by cosegregation of the mutation with the MH-susceptible phenotype within the family and by the demonstration that the mutant channel has increased sensitivity to both caffeine and halothane.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The feasibility of using complete RYR1 transcripts from leukocytes for sequence analysis offers an efficient and noninvasive method for scanning RYR1 for novel mutations.
Dominant and recessive central core disease associated with RYR1 mutations and fetal akinesia.
We studied seven patients (fetuses/infants) from six unrelated families affected by central core disease (CCD) and presenting with a fetal akinesia syndrome.
 Two fetuses died before birth (at 31 and 32 weeks) and five infants presented severe symptoms at birth (multiple arthrogryposis, congenital dislocation of the hips, severe hypotonia and hypotrophy, skeletal and feet deformities, kyphoscoliosis, etc.).
 Histochemical and ultrastructural studies of muscle biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of CCD showing unique large eccentric cores.
 Molecular genetic investigations led to the identification of mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene in three families, two with autosomal recessive (AR) and one with autosomal dominant (AD) inheritance.
 RYR1 gene mutations were located in the C-terminal domain in two families (AR and AD) and in the N-terminal domain of the third one (AR).
 This is the first report of mutations in the RYR1 gene involved in a severe form of CCD presenting as a fetal akinesia syndrome with AD and AR inheritances.
A large-scale effort, termed the Secreted Protein Discovery Initiative (SPDI), was undertaken to identify novel secreted and transmembrane proteins.
 In the first of several approaches, a biological signal sequence trap in yeast cells was utilized to identify cDNA clones encoding putative secreted proteins.
 A second strategy utilized various algorithms that recognize features such as the hydrophobic properties of signal sequences to identify putative proteins encoded by expressed sequence tags (ESTs) from human cDNA libraries.
 A third approach surveyed ESTs for protein sequence similarity to a set of known receptors and their ligands with the BLAST algorithm.
 Finally, both signal-sequence prediction algorithms and BLAST were used to identify single exons of potential genes from within human genomic sequence.
 The isolation of full-length cDNA clones for each of these candidate genes resulted in the identification of &gt;1000 novel proteins.
 A total of 256 of these cDNAs are still novel, including variants and novel genes, per the most recent GenBank release version.
 The success of this large-scale effort was assessed by a bioinformatics analysis of the proteins through predictions of protein domains, subcellular localizations, and possible functional roles.
 The SPDI collection should facilitate efforts to better understand intercellular communication, may lead to new understandings of human diseases, and provides potential opportunities for the development of therapeutics.
The secreted protein discovery initiative (SPDI), a large-scale effort to identify novel human secreted and transmembrane proteins: a bioinformatics assessment.
Polymorphisms and deduced amino acid substitutions in the coding sequence of the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene in individuals with malignant hyperthermia.
Twenty-one polymorphic sequence variants of the RYR1 gene, including 13 restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs), were identified by sequence analysis of human ryanodine receptor (RYR1) cDNAs from three individuals predisposed to malignant hyperthermia (MH).
 All RFLPs were detectable in PCR-amplified products, and their segregation was consistent with our initial finding of linkage to MH in the nine families previously informative for one or more intragenic markers (MacLennan et al., 1990, Nature 343:559-561).
 Four amino acid substitutions were identified in the study: Arg for Gly248, Cys for Arg470, Leu for Pro1785, and Cys for Gly2059.
 Of 45 families tested, a single family presented the Arg for Gly248 substitution where it segregated with malignant hyperthermia, making it a candidate mutation for predisposition to MH in man.
 The other three polymorphic substitutions failed to segregate with malignant hyperthermia in those families in which they occurred, implying that they represent polymorphisms with little or no effect on the function of the RYR1 gene.
Human cytochrome P450 3A7 has a distinct high catalytic activity for the 16alpha-hydroxylation of estrone but not 17beta-estradiol.
Like catechol estrogens, 16alpha-hydroxylated estrogens are hormonally active, chemically reactive, and potentially mutagenic.
 We report here our novel findings that human CYP3A7 has a distinct high catalytic activity for the NADPH-dependent 16alpha-hydroxylation of estrone (E(1); at 10 nM to 200 microM substrate concentrations) but not for the 16alpha-hydroxylation of 17beta-estradiol (E(2)).
 At a physiologically relevant low substrate concentration (10 nM), CYP3A7 had a strong catalytic activity for the 16alpha-hydroxylation of E(1), and the ratio of its 16alpha-hydroxylation to 2-hydroxylation was 107%.
 In addition to 16alpha-hydroxylation, CYP3A7 also had catalytic activity for the 2-, 4-, 6beta-, and 16beta-hydroxylation of E(1).
 However, when E(2) was the substrate, CYP3A7 had only very weak catalytic activity for its 16alpha-hydroxylation (&lt;6% of E(1) 16alpha-hydroxylation), and the ratio of its 16alpha-hydroxylation to 2-hydroxylation was 10-33%.
 Enzyme kinetic analysis showed that the maximal velocity and substrate-binding affinity (1/K(m)) for CYP3A7-mediated 16alpha-hydroxylation of E(1) were both approximately 10 times higher than those for E(2), thereby giving the maximal velocity:K(m) ratio of &gt;100 times higher for the 16alpha-hydroxylation of E(1) than for E(2).
 Given the recent findings that human CYP3A7 is a polymorphic isoform also expressed in adult liver and certain extrahepatic tissues (in addition to fetal tissues), our data raise the possibility that CYP3A7 may be an important catalyst for the local and/or systemic formation of the procarcinogenic 16alpha-hydroxyestrone in women.
Six novel nonsynonymous CYP1A2 gene polymorphisms: catalytic activities of the naturally occurring variant enzymes.
Six novel nonsynonymous nucleotide alterations were found in the cytochrome P450 1A2 gene in a Japanese population, which resulted in the following amino acid substitutions: T83M, E168Q, F186L, S212C, G299A, and T438I.
 These individuals were heterozygous for the amino acid substitutions.
 The potential functional alterations caused by the amino acid substitutions were characterized by a cDNA-mediated expression system using Chinese hamster V79 cells.
 Among the six CYP1A2 variants, F186L showed the most profound and statistically significant reduction in O-deethylation of phenacetin and 7-ethoxyresorufin.
 Kinetic analyses performed for the ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation revealed that the Vmax of the F186L variant was approximately 5% of that of the CYP1A2 wild type, despite a 5-fold lower Km value of the variant, the consequence of which was reduced enzymatic activity toward the substrate.
 Thus, for the first time, phenylalanine at residue 186 is suggested to be a critical amino acid for catalytic activity.
Molecular genetics of exercise-induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardia: identification of three novel cardiac ryanodine receptor mutations and two common calsequestrin 2 amino-acid polymorphisms.
Mutations of two myocardial calcium signaling molecules, ryanodine receptor 2 (RYR2) and calsequestrin 2 (CASQ2), may cause catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), a severe inherited arrhythmic disease manifesting with salvoes of exercise-induced bidirectional and polymorphic tachycardias.
 We screened 12 Finnish CPVT probands for mutations in these genes and identified three novel RYR2 mutations (V2306I, P4902L, R4959Q), which were absent in unaffected and control individuals.
 Although no obvious disease-causing mutations were identified in the CASQ2 gene, the molecular screening revealed two novel amino-acid polymorphisms (T66A and V76M).
 The frequencies of these polymorphisms in 185 unrelated probands with long QT syndrome and in 280 healthy blood donors were not significantly different.
 These data, combined with our previous findings, show that RYR2 mutations are present in at least 6/16 (38%) of the catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia families, while CASQ2 mutations must be a rare cause of CPVT.
Eukaryotic mRNAs containing premature termination codons (PTCs) are degraded by a process known as nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD).
 NMD has been suggested to require the recognition of PTC by an mRNA surveillance complex containing UPF1/SMG-2.
 In multicellular organisms, UPF1/SMG-2 is a phosphoprotein, and its phosphorylation contributes to NMD.
 Here we show that phosphorylated hUPF1, the human ortholog of UPF1/SMG-2, forms a complex with human orthologs of the C.
 elegans NMD proteins SMG-5 and SMG-7.
 The complex also associates with protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), resulting in dephosphorylation of hUPF1.
 Overexpression of hSMG-5 mutants that retain interaction with P-hUPF1 but which cannot induce its dephosphorylation impair NMD, suggesting that NMD requires P-hUPF1 dephosphorylation.
 We also show that P-hUPF1 forms distinct complexes containing different isoforms of hUPF3A.
 We propose that sequential phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of hUPF1 by hSMG-1 and PP2A, respectively, contribute to the remodeling of the mRNA surveillance complex.
Phosphorylation of hUPF1 induces formation of mRNA surveillance complexes containing hSMG-5 and hSMG-7.
Calcium release from sarcoplasmic reticulum is facilitated in human myotubes derived from carriers of the ryanodine receptor type 1 mutations Ile2182Phe and Gly2375Ala.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is caused by increased calcium release from sarcoplasmic reticulum, triggered by volatile anesthetics or depolarizing muscle relaxants.
 Numerous mutations associated with MH have been detected in the skeletal muscle type ryanodine receptor gene (RyR1), but so far facilitated calcium release has only been demonstrated for a few of them.
 This is a prerequisite for confirming the causative role of an RyR1 mutation for MH.
 Calcium release from sarcoplasmic reticulum induced by 4-chloro-m-cresol (4CmC), caffeine, and halothane was determined in human myotubes by calcium imaging.
 The RyR1 Ile2182Phe mutation and the RyR1 Gly2375Ala mutation have been identified in individuals susceptible to MH.
 In myotubes of individuals carrying the RyR1 Ile2182Phe or the RyR1 Gly2375Ala mutation, the EC(50) for caffeine and halothane was reduced; in the Ile2182Phe myotubes, the EC(50) for 4CmC was also reduced, all consistent with facilitated calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
 From these data we conclude that both mutations are pathogenic for MH.
MSH2 and ATR form a signaling module and regulate two branches of the damage response to DNA methylation.
The mismatch repair proteins function upstream in the DNA damage signaling pathways induced by the DNA methylating agent N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG).
 We report that MSH2 (MutS homolog 2) protein interacts with the ATR (ATM- and Rad3-related) kinase to form a signaling module and regulate the phosphorylation of Chk1 and SMC1 (structure maintenance of chromosome 1).
 We found that phosphorylation of Chk1 by ATR also requires checkpoint proteins Rad17 and replication protein A.
 In contrast, phosphorylation of SMC1 by ATR is independent of Rad17 and replication protein A, suggesting that the signaling pathway leading to SMC1 phosphorylation is distinct from that mediated by the checkpoint proteins.
 In addition, both MSH2 and Rad17 are required for the activation of the S-phase checkpoint to suppress DNA synthesis in response to MNNG, and phosphorylation of SMC1 is required for cellular survival.
 These data support a model in which MSH2 and ATR function upstream to regulate two branches of the response pathway to DNA damage caused by MNNG.
Central core disease (CCD) is a dominantly inherited congenital myopathy allelic to malignant hyperthermia (MH) caused by mutations in the RYR1 gene on chromosome 19q13.1.
 Eleven individuals with RYR1 mutations are described.
 Four index cases showed features consistent with a congenital myopathy (hypotonia, delayed motor milestones, and skeletal abnormalities including congenital hip dislocation and scoliosis).
 All four cases and subsequently seven other family members were found to possess novel mutations in the RYR1 gene.
 The degree of disability varied from one clinically normal individual, to another who had never achieved independent ambulation (the only patient with a de novo mutation).
 Four cases showed a mild reduction in vital capacity, repeated nocturnal polysomnography showed hypoxaemia in one case.
 A variety of muscle biopsy features were found; central cores were absent in the youngest case, and the biopsy specimens from two others were more suggestive of mini-core myopathy.
 In all cases missense mutations in exons 101, 102, and 103 of the RYR1 gene on were found.
 Future laboratory diagnosis of suspected cases and family members will be less invasive and more accurate with DNA analysis.
 Clinicians, especially paediatricians and orthopaedic surgeons, should be aware of this disorder because of the potential risk of MH.
Central core disease: clinical, pathological, and genetic features.
As a base for human transcriptome and functional genomics, we created the "full-length long Japan" (FLJ) collection of sequenced human cDNAs.
 We determined the entire sequence of 21,243 selected clones and found that 14,490 cDNAs (10,897 clusters) were unique to the FLJ collection.
 About half of them (5,416) seemed to be protein-coding.
 Of those, 1,999 clusters had not been predicted by computational methods.
 The distribution of GC content of nonpredicted cDNAs had a peak at approximately 58% compared with a peak at approximately 42%for predicted cDNAs.
 Thus, there seems to be a slight bias against GC-rich transcripts in current gene prediction procedures.
 The rest of the cDNAs unique to the FLJ collection (5,481) contained no obvious open reading frames (ORFs) and thus are candidate noncoding RNAs.
 About one-fourth of them (1,378) showed a clear pattern of splicing.
 The distribution of GC content of noncoding cDNAs was narrow and had a peak at approximately 42%, relatively low compared with that of protein-coding cDNAs.
Complete sequencing and characterization of 21,243 full-length human cDNAs.
Functional characterization of four allelic variants of human cytochrome P450 1A2.
Human cytochrome P450 1A2 catalyzes important reactions in xenobiotic metabolism, including the N-hydroxylation of carcinogenic aromatic amines.
 In 2001, Chevalier et al.
 reported four new P450 1A2 sequence variants in the human population.
 We have now expressed these variants in Escherichia coli and measured protein expression (optical spectroscopy of holoenzyme and immunoblotting) and bioactivation of IQ (2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline) and MeIQ (2-amino-2,4-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline) in the lacZ reversion mutagenicity test.
 Enzyme kinetic analyses were performed for N-hydroxylation of five heterocyclic amine substrates and for O-deethylation of phenacetin.
 The most drastic effect was that of the R431W substitution: no holoenzyme was detectable.
 This residue is located in the "meander" peptide region and earlier site-directed mutagenesis studies demonstrated that it is critical for maintenance of protein tertiary structure.
 The other three variants had subtly different catalytic activities compared to the wild-type enzyme.
ATR is an essential protein that functions as a damage sensor and a proximal kinase in the DNA damage checkpoint response in mammalian cells.
 It is a member of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-like kinase (PIKK) family, which includes ATM, ATR, and DNA-dependent protein kinase.
 Recently, it was found that ATM is an oligomeric protein that is converted to an active monomeric form by phosphorylation in trans upon DNA damage, and this raised the possibility that other members of the PIKK family may be regulated in a similar manner.
 Here we show that ATR is a monomeric protein associated with a smaller protein called ATRIP with moderate affinity.
 The ATR protein by itself or in the form of the ATR-ATRIP heterodimer binds to naked or replication protein A (RPA)-covered DNAs with comparable affinities.
 However, the phosphorylation of RPA by ATR is dependent on single-stranded DNA and is stimulated by ATRIP.
 These findings suggest that the regulation and mechanism of action of ATR are fundamentally different from those of the other PIKK proteins.
Quaternary structure of ATR and effects of ATRIP and replication protein A on its DNA binding and kinase activities.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Histological anomalies associated with malignant hyperthermia (MH) have been scarcely reported.
 In some patients susceptible to MH (MHS), central cores have been identified and a genetic association has been proposed, but multiminicore lesions have not been systematically reported.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To analyze the association between multiminicores and MHS in a large family with MH with an approach combining histology, in vitro contracture tests, and genetic analysis.
&lt;h4&gt;Patients and methods&lt;/h4&gt;Twenty-nine members of an MH family (147 members) were investigated.
&lt;h4&gt;Main outcome measures&lt;/h4&gt;Muscle biopsy specimens were analyzed histologically and with in vitro contracture tests.
 Genetic analyses were performed to determine the presence of mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;According to the gold standard in vitro contracture tests, 17 patients were diagnosed as having MHS and 10 as not being susceptible.
 Multiminicores were found in 16 of the 17 MHS patients and in a single nonsusceptible participant.
 A linkage between the MH trait and the RYR1 locus in chromosome 19 was demonstrated, whereas no already known mutations were found.
 Two missense heterozygous mutations (R2676W and T2787S) were identified from sequencing of the entire coding complementary DNA.
 Overall, we found a significant association between MHS and the presence of multiminicores (chi(2) = 26.5, P&lt;.001) on the one hand and the presence of new mutations in the RYR1 gene (chi(2) = 19.0, P&lt;.001) on the other hand.
 This remarkably high occurrence of multiminicores in an MHS family is uncommon, and genetic analyses indicate that the association between multiminicores and MHS is linked to a novel R2656W and T2787S substitution present on the same allele of the RYR1 gene.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;These results indicate that multiminicore lesions are observed in MHS patients with neither clinical signs related to multiminicore disease nor histological features of congenital myopathies.
 These multiminicore lesions may be secondary to mutations in the RYR1 gene.
 As a consequence, these patients must be distinguished from patients with multiminicore disease and from other MHS patients for whom multiminicores are not observed.
Multiminicore disease in a family susceptible to malignant hyperthermia: histology, in vitro contracture tests, and genetic characterization.
Ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated and Rad3-related (ATR) plays an essential role in the maintenance of genome integrity and cell viability.
 The kinase is activated in response to DNA damage and initiates a checkpoint signaling cascade by phosphorylating a number of downstream substrates including Chk1.
 Unlike ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM), which appears to be mainly activated by DNA double-strand breaks, ATR can be activated by a variety of DNA damaging agents.
 However, it is still unclear what triggers ATR activation in response to such diverse DNA lesions.
 One model proposes that ATR can directly recognize DNA lesions, while other recent data suggest that ATR is activated by a common single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) intermediate generated during DNA repair.
 In this study, we show that UV lesions do not directly activate ATR in vivo.
 In addition, ssDNA lesions created during the repair of UV damage are also not sufficient to activate the ATR-dependent pathway.
 ATR activation is only observed in replicating cells indicating that replication stress is required to trigger the ATR-mediated checkpoint cascade in response to UV irradiation.
 Interestingly, H2AX appears to be required for the accumulation of ATR at stalled replication forks.
 Together our data suggest that ssDNA at arrested replication forks recruits ATR and initiates ATR-mediated phosphorylation of H2AX and Chk1.
 Phosphorylated H2AX might further facilitate ATR activation by stabilizing ATR at the sites of arrested replication forks.
UV-induced ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated and Rad3-related (ATR) activation requires replication stress.
Recruitment of the cell cycle checkpoint kinase ATR to chromatin during S-phase.
The ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) and Rad3-related kinase (ATR) is a central component of the cell cycle checkpoint machinery required to induce cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage.
 Accumulating evidence suggests a role for ATR in signaling DNA damage during S-phase.
 Here we show that ATR is recruited to nuclear foci induced by replication fork stalling in a manner that is dependent on the single stranded binding protein replication protein A (RPA).
 ATR associates with chromatin in asynchronous cell cultures, and we use a variety of approaches to examine the association of ATR with chromatin in the absence of agents that cause genotoxic stress.
 Under our experimental conditions, ATR exhibits a decreased affinity for chromatin in quiescent cells and cells synchronized at mitosis but an increased affinity for chromatin as cells re-enter the cell cycle.
 Using centrifugal elutriation to obtain cells enriched at various stages of the cell cycle, we show that ATR associates with chromatin in a cell cycle-dependent manner, specifically during S-phase.
 Cell cycle association of ATR with chromatin mirrors that of RPA in addition to claspin, a cell cycle checkpoint protein previously shown to be a component of the replication machinery.
 Furthermore, association of ATR with chromatin occurs in the absence of detectable DNA damage and cell cycle checkpoint activation.
 These data are consistent with a model whereby ATR is recruited to chromatin during the unperturbed cell cycle and points to a role of ATR in monitoring genome integrity during normal S-phase progression.
RYR1 mutations in UK central core disease patients: more than just the C-terminal transmembrane region of the RYR1 gene.
Gene symbol: RYR2.
 Disease: effort-induced polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias.
Gene symbol: RYR2.
 Disease: effort-induced polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias.
BCR/ABL translocates to the nucleus and disrupts an ATR-dependent intra-S phase checkpoint.
Chronic myelogeneous leukemia (CML) is a two-stage disease associated with expression of the BCR/ABL tyrosine kinase protein.
 However, whether BCR/ABL expression directly causes blast crisis, and if so by what mechanism, is unknown.
 We have found that BCR/ABL translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus after genotoxic stress.
 Furthermore, BCR/ABL increases DNA double-strand damage after etoposide treatment and leads to a defect in an intra-S phase checkpoint, causing a radioresistant DNA synthesis (RDS) phenotype.
 In the nucleus, BCR/ABL associates with the ataxia-telangiectasia and rad 3-related protein (ATR) and disrupts ATR-dependent signal transduction.
 Overexpression of ATR in a BCR/ABL-expressing cell line corrects the DNA damage phenotype.
 These results demonstrate a nuclear role for BCR/ABL in altering the cellular response to DNA damage.
Chromosome 19 has the highest gene density of all human chromosomes, more than double the genome-wide average.
 The large clustered gene families, corresponding high G + C content, CpG islands and density of repetitive DNA indicate a chromosome rich in biological and evolutionary significance.
 Here we describe 55.8 million base pairs of highly accurate finished sequence representing 99.9% of the euchromatin portion of the chromosome.
 Manual curation of gene loci reveals 1,461 protein-coding genes and 321 pseudogenes.
 Among these are genes directly implicated in mendelian disorders, including familial hypercholesterolaemia and insulin-resistant diabetes.
 Nearly one-quarter of these genes belong to tandemly arranged families, encompassing more than 25% of the chromosome.
 Comparative analyses show a fascinating picture of conservation and divergence, revealing large blocks of gene orthology with rodents, scattered regions with more recent gene family expansions and deletions, and segments of coding and non-coding conservation with the distant fish species Takifugu.
The DNA sequence and biology of human chromosome 19.
Members of the PI 3-kinase-related kinase (PIKK) family function in mitogenic and stress-induced signaling pathways in eukaryotic cells.
 Here, we characterize the newest PIKK family member, hSMG-1, as a genotoxic stress-activated protein kinase that displays some functional overlap with the related kinase, ATM, in human cells.
 Both ATM and hSMG-1 phosphorylate Ser/Thr-Gln-containing target sequences in the checkpoint protein p53 and the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) protein hUpf1.
 Expression of hSMG-1 is required for optimal p53 activation after cellular exposure to genotoxic stress, and depletion of hSMG-1 leads to spontaneous DNA damage and increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR).
 Moreover, IR exposure triggers hUpf1 phosphorylation at Ser/Thr-Gln motifs, and both ATM and hSMG-1 contribute to these phosphorylation events.
 Finally, NMD is suppressed in hSMG-1-but not ATM-deficient cells.
 These results indicate that hSMG-1 plays important roles in the maintenance of both genome and transcriptome integrity in human cells.
The mRNA surveillance protein hSMG-1 functions in genotoxic stress response pathways in mammalian cells.
Characterization of MR-1, a novel myofibrillogenesis regulator in human muscle.
The actin-myosin contractile apparatus consists of several thick filament and thin filament proteins.
 Specific regulatory mechanisms are involved in this highly ordered process.
 In this paper, we reported the identification and characterization of a novel myofibrillogenesis regulator, MR-1.
 The MR-1 gene was cloned from human skeletal muscle cDNA library by using a strategy that involves EST data base searching, PCR and RACE.
 The MR-1 gene is located on human chromosome 2q35 and encodes a 142 aa protein.
 Northern blot revealed that the mRNA level of MR-1 was highest in the skeletal muscle and certain level of MR-1 expression was also observed in heart, liver and kidney.
 Immunohistochemical assay confirmed that the MR-1 protein existed in human myocardial myofibrils.
 It was found by yeast two-hybrid screening and confirmed by in vitro binding assay that MR-1 could interact with sarcomeric proteins, such as myosin regulatory light chain, myomesin 1 and beta-enolase.
 These studies suggested that MR-1 might play a regulatory role in the muscle cell and it was worth investigating further.
&lt;h4&gt;Aim&lt;/h4&gt;To investigate the transactivating effect of hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein and to screen genes transactivated by HCV core protein.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;pcDNA3.1(-)-core containing full-length HCV core gene was constructed by insertion of HCV core gene into EcoRI/BamHI site.
 HepG2 cells were cotransfected with pcDNA3.1(-)-core and pSV-lacZ.
 After 48 h, cells were collected and detected for the expression of beta-gal by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit.
 HepG2 cells were transiently transfected with pcDNA3.1(-)-core using Lipofectamine reagent.
 Cells were collected and total mRNA was isolated.
 A subtracted cDNA library was generated and constructed into a pGEM-Teasy vector.
 The library was amplified with E.
 coli strain JM109.
 The cDNAs were sequenced and analyzed in GenBank with BLAST search after polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;The core mRNA and protein could be detected in HepG2 cell lysate which was transfected by the pcDNA3.1(-)-core.
 The activity of beta-galactosidase in HepG2 cells transfected by the pcDNA3.1(-)-core was 5.4 times higher than that of HepG2 cells transfected by control plasmid.
 The subtractive library of genes transactivated by HCV core protein was constructed successfully.
 The amplified library contained 233 positive clones.
 Colony PCR showed that 213 clones contained 100-1 000 bp inserts.
 Sequence analysis was performed in 63 clones.
 Six of the sequences were unknown genes.
 The full length sequences were obtained with bioinformatics method, accepted by GenBank.
 It was suggested that six novel cDNA sequences might be target genes transactivated by HCV core protein.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;The core protein of HCV has transactivating effects on SV40 early promoter/enhancer.
 A total of 63 clones from cDNA library were randomly chosen and sequenced.
 Using the BLAST program at the National Center for Biotechnology Information, six of the sequences were unknown genes.
 The other 57 sequences were highly similar to known genes.
Transactivating effect of hepatitis C virus core protein: a suppression subtractive hybridization study.
Minichromosome maintenance proteins are direct targets of the ATM and ATR checkpoint kinases.
The minichromosome maintenance (MCM) 2-7 helicase complex functions to initiate and elongate replication forks.
 Cell cycle checkpoint signaling pathways regulate DNA replication to maintain genomic stability.
 We describe four lines of evidence that ATM/ATR-dependent (ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated/ATM- and Rad3-related) checkpoint pathways are directly linked to three members of the MCM complex.
 First, ATM phosphorylates MCM3 on S535 in response to ionizing radiation.
 Second, ATR phosphorylates MCM2 on S108 in response to multiple forms of DNA damage and stalling of replication forks.
 Third, ATR-interacting protein (ATRIP)-ATR interacts with MCM7.
 Fourth, reducing the amount of MCM7 in cells disrupts checkpoint signaling and causes an intra-S-phase checkpoint defect.
 Thus, the MCM complex is a platform for multiple DNA damage-dependent regulatory signals that control DNA replication.
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) and malignant hyperthermia (MH) are autosomal-dominant genetically heterogeneous ion channelopathies.
 MH has been described in patients with HypoPP, suggesting a potential link between these disorders.
 However, a common genetic determinant has not been described.
 With the aim of corroborating this association, four candidate genes were screened in two independent HypoPP patients, one of whom was also diagnosed as MH-susceptible and the other as MH-normal by the in vitro contracture test (IVCT).
 An A&gt;G change at nucleotide 7025 was detected in the RYR1 gene in the HypoPP/MH-susceptible patient.
 Detection of the same mutation in three independent MH families suggested that 7025A&gt;G represents a novel MH-susceptibility allele and that MH and HypoPP occurred independently in the case presented.
 Conclusive evidence in support of the hypothesis that MH and HypoPP are allelic was therefore not obtained.
Mutation analysis of two patients with hypokalemic periodic paralysis and suspected malignant hyperthermia.
Crystal structures of human cytochrome P450 3A4 bound to metyrapone and progesterone.
Cytochromes P450 (P450s) metabolize a wide range of endogenous compounds and xenobiotics, such as pollutants, environmental compounds, and drug molecules.
 The microsomal, membrane-associated, P450 isoforms CYP3A4, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1, and CYP1A2 are responsible for the oxidative metabolism of more than 90% of marketed drugs.
 Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) metabolizes more drug molecules than all other isoforms combined.
 Here we report three crystal structures of CYP3A4: unliganded, bound to the inhibitor metyrapone, and bound to the substrate progesterone.
 The structures revealed a surprisingly small active site, with little conformational change associated with the binding of either compound.
 An unexpected peripheral binding site is identified, located above a phenylalanine cluster, which may be involved in the initial recognition of substrates or allosteric effectors.
The structure of human microsomal cytochrome P450 3A4 determined by X-ray crystallography to 2.05-A resolution.
The structure of P450 3A4 was determined by x-ray crystallography to 2.05-A resolution.
 P450 3A4 catalyzes the metabolic clearance of a large number of clinically used drugs, and a number of adverse drug-drug interactions reflect the inhibition or induction of the enzyme.
 P450 3A4 exhibits a relatively large substrate-binding cavity that is consistent with its capacity to oxidize bulky substrates such as cyclosporin, statins, taxanes, and macrolide antibiotics.
 Family 3A P450s also exhibit unusual kinetic characteristics that suggest simultaneous occupancy by smaller substrates.
 Although the active site volume is similar to that of P450 2C8 (PDB code: 1PQ2), the shape of the active site cavity differs considerably due to differences in the folding and packing of portions of the protein that form the cavity.
 Compared with P450 2C8, the active site cavity of 3A4 is much larger near the heme iron.
 The lower constraints on the motions of small substrates near the site of oxygen activation may diminish the efficiency of substrate oxidation, which may, in turn, be improved by space restrictions imposed by the presence of a second substrate molecule.
 The structure of P450 3A4 should facilitate a better understanding of the substrate selectivity of the enzyme.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Paroxysmal dystonic choreoathetosis (PDC) is characterized by attacks of involuntary movements that occur spontaneously while at rest and following caffeine or alcohol consumption.
 Previously, we and others identified a locus for autosomal dominant PDC on chromosome 2q33-2q35.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To identify the PDC gene.
&lt;h4&gt;Design&lt;/h4&gt;Analysis of PDC positional candidate genes by exon sequencing and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
&lt;h4&gt;Setting&lt;/h4&gt;Outpatient clinical and molecular genetic laboratory at a university hospital.
 Patients Affected (n = 12) and unaffected (n = 26) subjects from 2 unrelated families with PDC and 105 unrelated control subjects.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;We identified missense mutations in the myofibrillogenesis regulator gene (MR-1) in affected subjects in 2 unrelated PDC kindreds.
 These mutations were absent in control subjects and caused substitutions of valine for alanine at amino acid positions 7 and 9.
 The substitutions disturb interspecies conserved residues and are predicted to alter the MR-1 gene's amino-terminal alpha helix.
 The MR-1 exon containing these mutations (exon 1) was expressed only in the brain, a finding that explains the brain-specific symptoms of subjects with these mutations.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Although MR-1 gene function is unknown, the precedence of ion channel disturbance in other episodic neurologic disorders suggests that the pathophysiologic features of PDC also involve abnormal ion localization.
 The discovery that MR-1 mutations underlie PDC provides opportunities to explore this condition's pathophysiologic characteristics and may provide insight into the causes of other paroxysmal neurologic disorders as well as the neurophysiologic mechanisms of alcohol and caffeine, which frequently precipitate PDC attacks.
Myofibrillogenesis regulator 1 gene mutations cause paroxysmal dystonic choreoathetosis.
ATR couples FANCD2 monoubiquitination to the DNA-damage response.
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a multigenic autosomal recessive cancer susceptibility syndrome.
 The FA pathway regulates the monoubiquitination of FANCD2 and the assembly of damage-associated FANCD2 nuclear foci.
 How FANCD2 monoubiquitination is coupled to the DNA-damage response has remained undetermined.
 Here, we demonstrate that the ATR checkpoint kinase and RPA1 are required for efficient FANCD2 monoubiquitination.
 Deficiency of ATR function, either in Seckel syndrome, which clinically resembles Fanconi anemia, or by siRNA silencing, results in the formation of radial chromosomes in response to the DNA cross-linker, mitomycin C (MMC), thus mimicking the chromosome instability of FA cells.
Human cytochrome P450 3A4 forms a series of minor testosterone hydroxylation products in addition to 6 beta-hydroxytestosterone, the major product.
 One of these, formed at the next highest rate after the 6 beta- and 2 beta-hydroxy products, was identified as 1 beta-hydroxytestosterone.
 This product was characterized from a mixture of testosterone oxidation products using an HPLC-solid phase extraction-cryoprobe NMR/time-of-flight mass spectrometry system, with an estimated total of approximately 6 microg of this product.
 Mass spectrometry established the formula as C(19)H(29)O(3) (MH(+) 305.2080).
 The 1-position of the added hydroxyl group was established by correlated spectroscopy and heteronuclear spin quantum correlation experiments, and the beta-stereochemistry of the added hydroxyl group was assigned with a nuclear Overhauser correlated spectroscopy experiment (1 alpha-H).
 Of several human P450s examined, only P450 3A4 formed this product.
 The product was also formed in human liver microsomes.
Testosterone 1 beta-hydroxylation by human cytochrome P450 3A4.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle, manifested as a life-threatening hypermetabolic crisis after exposure to anesthetics.
 Type I ryanodine receptor 1 is the primary gene responsible for susceptibility to MH as well as central core disease, a congenital myopathy that predisposes susceptibility to MH.
 More than 40 mutations in the RyR1 gene cluster in three coding regions: the N-terminus, central, and C-terminus regions.
 However, the frequency of mutations in each region has not been studied in the North American MH-susceptible population.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The authors tested 124 unrelated patients with MH susceptibility for the presence of mutations in the N-terminus (exons 2, 6, 9, 11, 12, and 17), central (exons 39, 40, 44, 45, and 46), and C-terminus (exons 95, 100, 101, and 102) regions.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Fourteen mutations have been identified in 29 of 124 MH-susceptible patients (23%).
 Approximately 70% of the mutations, which include a novel mutation, Ala 2437Val, were in the central region.
 In 8 patients (28%), mutations were identified in the N-terminus region.
 Screening the C-terminus region yielded a novel mutation, Leu4824Pro, in a single patient with a diagnosis of central core disease.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The detection rate for mutations is only 23% by screening mutations (or exons) listed in the 2002 North American consensus panel.
 The implications from this study suggest that testing the central region first is currently the most effective screening strategy for the North American population.
 Screening more exons in the three hot spots may be needed to find an accurate frequency of mutations in the RyR1 gene.
Malignant hyperthermia in North America: genetic screening of the three hot spots in the type I ryanodine receptor gene.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Swimming is a relatively genotype-specific arrhythmogenic trigger for type 1 long-QT syndrome (LQT1).
 We hypothesize that mimickers of concealed LQT1, namely catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), may also underlie swimming-triggered cardiac events.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;Between August 1997 and May 2003, 388 consecutive, unrelated patients were referred specifically for LQTS genetic testing.
 The presence of a personal and/or family history of a near-drowning or drowning was determined by review of the medical records and/or phone interviews and was blinded to genetic test results.
 Comprehensive mutational analysis of the 5 LQTS-causing channel genes, KCNQ1 (LQT1), KCNH2 (LQT2), SCN5A (LQT3), KCNE1 (LQT5), and KCNE2 (LQT6), along with KCNJ2 (Andersen-Tawil syndrome) and targeted analysis of 18 CPVT1-associated exons in RyR2, was performed with the use of denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and direct DNA sequencing.
 Approximately 11% (43 of 388) of the index cases had a positive swimming phenotype.
 Thirty-three of these 43 index cases had a "Schwartz" score (&gt; or =4) suggesting high clinical probability of LQTS.
 Among this subset, 28 patients (85%) were LQT1, 2 patients (6%) were LQT2, and 3 were genotype negative.
 Among the 10 cases with low clinical probability for LQTS, 9 had novel, putative CPVT1-causing RyR2 mutations.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;In contrast to previous studies that suggested universal LQT1 specificity, genetic heterogeneity underlies channelopathies that are suspected chiefly because of a near-drowning or drowning.
 CPVT1 and strategic genotyping of RyR2 should be considered when LQT1 is excluded in the pathogenesis of a swimming-triggered arrhythmia syndrome.
Spectrum and frequency of cardiac channel defects in swimming-triggered arrhythmia syndromes.
Genetic variation in eleven phase I drug metabolism genes in an ethnically diverse population.
The extent of genetic variation found in drug metabolism genes and its contribution to interindividual variation in response to medication remains incompletely understood.
 To better determine the identity and frequency of variation in 11 phase I drug metabolism genes, the exons and flanking intronic regions of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoenzyme genes CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 were amplified from genomic DNA and sequenced.
 A total of 60 kb of bi-directional sequence was generated from each of 93 human DNAs, which included Caucasian, African-American and Asian samples.
 There were 388 different polymorphisms identified.
 These included 269 non-coding, 45 synonymous and 74 non-synonymous polymorphisms.
 Of these, 54% were novel and included 176 non-coding, 14 synonymous and 21 non-synonymous polymorphisms.
 Of the novel variants observed, 85 were represented by single occurrences of the minor allele in the sample set.
 Much of the variation observed was from low-frequency alleles.
 Comparatively, these genes are variation-rich.
 Calculations measuring genetic diversity revealed that while the values for the individual genes are widely variable, the overall nucleotide diversity of 7.7 x 10(-4) and polymorphism parameter of 11.5 x 10(-4) are higher than those previously reported for other gene sets.
 Several independent measurements indicate that these genes are under selective pressure, particularly for polymorphisms corresponding to non-synonymous amino acid changes.
 There is relatively little difference in measurements of diversity among the ethnic groups, but there are large differences among the genes and gene subfamilies themselves.
 Of the three CYP subfamilies involved in phase I drug metabolism (1, 2, and 3), subfamily 2 displays the highest levels of genetic diversity.
The National Institutes of Health's Mammalian Gene Collection (MGC) project was designed to generate and sequence a publicly accessible cDNA resource containing a complete open reading frame (ORF) for every human and mouse gene.
 The project initially used a random strategy to select clones from a large number of cDNA libraries from diverse tissues.
 Candidate clones were chosen based on 5'-EST sequences, and then fully sequenced to high accuracy and analyzed by algorithms developed for this project.
 Currently, more than 11,000 human and 10,000 mouse genes are represented in MGC by at least one clone with a full ORF.
 The random selection approach is now reaching a saturation point, and a transition to protocols targeted at the missing transcripts is now required to complete the mouse and human collections.
 Comparison of the sequence of the MGC clones to reference genome sequences reveals that most cDNA clones are of very high sequence quality, although it is likely that some cDNAs may carry missense variants as a consequence of experimental artifact, such as PCR, cloning, or reverse transcriptase errors.
 Recently, a rat cDNA component was added to the project, and ongoing frog (Xenopus) and zebrafish (Danio) cDNA projects were expanded to take advantage of the high-throughput MGC pipeline.
The status, quality, and expansion of the NIH full-length cDNA project: the Mammalian Gene Collection (MGC).
Seckel syndrome exhibits cellular features demonstrating defects in the ATR-signalling pathway.
To date, the only reported genetic defect identified in the developmental disorder, Seckel syndrome, is a mutation in ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein (ATR).
 Seckel syndrome is clinically and genetically heterogeneous and whether defects in ATR significantly contribute to Seckel syndrome is unclear.
 Firstly, we characterize ATR-Seckel cells for their response to DNA damage.
 ATR-Seckel cells display impaired phosphorylation of ATR-dependent substrates, impaired G2/M checkpoint arrest and elevated micronucleus (MN) formation following exposure to UV and agents that cause replication stalling.
 We describe a novel phenotype, designated nuclear fragmentation (NF), that occurs following replication arrest.
 Finally, we report that ATR-Seckel cells have an endogenously increased number of centrosomes in mitotic cells demonstrating a novel role for ATR in regulating centrosome stability.
 We exploit these phenotypes to examine cell lines derived from additional unrelated Seckel syndrome patients.
 We show that impaired phosphorylation of ATR-dependent substrates is a common but not invariant feature of Seckel syndrome cell lines.
 In contrast, all cell lines displayed defective G2/M arrest, increased levels of NF and MN formation following exposure to agents that cause replication stalling.
 All the Seckel syndrome cell lines examined showed increased endogenous centrosome numbers.
 Though ATR cDNA can complement the defects in ATR-Seckel cells, it failed to complement any of the additional cell lines.
 We conclude that Seckel syndrome represents a further damage response disorder that is uniquely associated with defects in the ATR-signalling pathway resulting in failed checkpoint arrest following exposure to replication fork stalling.
Paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) is characterized by spontaneous hyperkinetic attacks that are precipitated by alcohol, coffee, stress and fatigue.
 We report mutations in the myofibrillogenesis regulator 1 (MR-1) gene causing PNKD in 50 individuals from eight families.
 The mutations cause changes (Ala to Val) in the N-terminal region of two MR-1 isoforms.
 The MR-1L isoform is specifically expressed in brain and is localized to the cell membrane while the MR-1S isoform is ubiquitously expressed and shows diffuse cytoplasmic and nuclear localization.
 Bioinformatic analysis reveals that the MR-1 gene is homologous to the hydroxyacylglutathione hydrolase (HAGH) gene.
 HAGH functions in a pathway to detoxify methylglyoxal, a compound present in coffee and alcoholic beverages and produced as a by-product of oxidative stress.
 Our results suggest a mechanism whereby alcohol, coffee and stress may act as precipitants of attacks in PNKD.
 Stress response pathways will be important areas for elucidation of episodic disease genetics where stress is a common precipitant of many common disorders like epilepsy, migraine and cardiac arrhythmias.
The gene for paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia encodes an enzyme in a stress response pathway.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To perform a molecular autopsy of the RyR2-encoded cardiac ryanodine receptor/calcium release channel in medical examiner/coroner's cases of sudden unexplained death (SUD).
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;From September 1998 to March 2004, 49 cases of SUD were referred by medical examiners/coroners to the Sudden Death Genomics Laboratory at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn, for a cardiac channel molecular autopsy.
 Mutational analysis of 18 exons of RyR2 implicated previously in the pathogenesis of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) was performed on genomic DNA using polymerase chain reaction, denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography, and direct DNA sequencing.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;This cohort of 49 cases of SUD included 30 males, 13 with a family history of syncope, cardiac arrest, or sudden cardiac death (mean +/- SD age at death, 14.2 +/-10.9 years).
 Six distinct RyR2 missense mutations (3 novel) were discovered in 7 cases (14%, 6 males, mean +/- SD age at death, 13.6 +/-11.2 years) of SUD.
 The activities at the time of SUD were exertion (3), emotion (1), and unknown (3).
 The mutations, R420W, S2246L, N4097S, E4146K, T4158P, and R4497C, involved nonconservative amino acid substitutions in highly conserved residues across species and were not seen in 400 reference alleles.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;This study represents the first molecular autopsy of RyR2 in medical examiner-referred cases of SUD.
 A targeted analysis of only 18 of the 105 protein-encoding exons of the cardiac ryanodine receptor/calcium release channel revealed potential CPVT1-causing RyR2 mutations in 1 of every 7 cases of SUD.
 These findings suggest that postmortem genetic testing of RyR2 should be considered as a part of the comprehensive medicolegal autopsy investigation of a SUD case and that this potentially heritable and often elusive arrhythmia syndrome be scrutinized carefully in family members of those who experience SUD.
Targeted mutational analysis of the RyR2-encoded cardiac ryanodine receptor in sudden unexplained death: a molecular autopsy of 49 medical examiner/coroner's cases.
Human chromosome 16 features one of the highest levels of segmentally duplicated sequence among the human autosomes.
 We report here the 78,884,754 base pairs of finished chromosome 16 sequence, representing over 99.9% of its euchromatin.
 Manual annotation revealed 880 protein-coding genes confirmed by 1,670 aligned transcripts, 19 transfer RNA genes, 341 pseudogenes and three RNA pseudogenes.
 These genes include metallothionein, cadherin and iroquois gene families, as well as the disease genes for polycystic kidney disease and acute myelomonocytic leukaemia.
 Several large-scale structural polymorphisms spanning hundreds of kilobase pairs were identified and result in gene content differences among humans.
 Whereas the segmental duplications of chromosome 16 are enriched in the relatively gene-poor pericentromere of the p arm, some are involved in recent gene duplication and conversion events that are likely to have had an impact on the evolution of primates and human disease susceptibility.
The sequence and analysis of duplication-rich human chromosome 16.
Interindividual differences in human CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 expression appear to be associated with variability in risk toward various types of environmental toxicity and cancer.
 These two genes are oriented head-to-head on human chromosome 15; the 23.3-kb spacer region might contain distinct regulatory regions for CYP1A1 and distinct regulatory regions for CYP1A2, or the regulatory regions for the two genes might overlap one another.
 From 24 unrelated subjects of five major, geographically-isolated subgroups, we resequenced both genes (all exons and all introns) plus some 3' flanking sequences and the entire spacer region (39.6 kb total); 85 SNPs were found, 49 of which were not currently in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database.
 Of the 57 double-hit SNPs, we carried out SNP-typing in 94 Africans, 96 Asians, and 83 Caucasians and found striking ethnic differences in SNP frequencies and haplotype evolution; the two CYP1A1 SNPs and the one CYP1A2 SNP that are most commonly used in epidemiological studies were shown not to be representative haplotype tag SNPs across these three human subgroups.
 Four BAC-transgenic mouse lines, carrying the human CYP1A2 and 15,190 bp of 5' flank, expressed only negligible basal or inducible CYP1A2 mRNA.
 A fifth BAC-transgenic mouse line, carrying both the human CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes and ample amounts of 3' flanking sequences, plus all of the spacer region--in the absence of the mouse Cyp1a1 or Cyp1a2 genes--expressed the human CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 mRNA, protein and enzyme activities in liver and nonhepatic tissues very similar to that of the mouse.
 Comparison of this hCYP1A1_1A2 transgenic line with hCYP1A1_1A2 lines carrying other common human haplotypes will enable us to evaluate function in human CYP1A1_CYP1A2 locus variability, with regard to toxicity and cancer caused by combustion products.
Toward the evaluation of function in genetic variability: characterizing human SNP frequencies and establishing BAC-transgenic mice carrying the human CYP1A1_CYP1A2 locus.
p18 was first identified as a factor associated with a macromolecular tRNA synthetase complex.
 Here we describe the mouse p18 loss-of-function phenotype and a role for p18 in the DNA damage response.
 Inactivation of both p18 alleles caused embryonic lethality, while heterozygous mice showed high susceptibility to spontaneous tumors.
 p18 was induced and translocated to the nucleus in response to DNA damage.
 Expression of p18 resulted in elevated p53 levels, while p18 depletion blocked p53 induction.
 p18 directly interacted with ATM/ATR in response to DNA damage.
 The activity of ATM was dependent on the level of p18, suggesting the requirement of p18 for the activation of ATM.
 Low p18 expression was frequently observed in different human cancer cell lines and tissues.
 These results suggest that p18 is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor and a key factor for ATM/ATR-mediated p53 activation.
The haploinsufficient tumor suppressor p18 upregulates p53 via interactions with ATM/ATR.
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR) and DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) are members of the phosphoinositide-3-kinase-related protein kinase (PIKK) family, and are rapidly activated in response to DNA damage.
 ATM and DNA-PKcs respond mainly to DNA double-strand breaks, whereas ATR is activated by single-stranded DNA and stalled DNA replication forks.
 In all cases, activation involves their recruitment to the sites of damage.
 Here we identify related, conserved carboxy-terminal motifs in human Nbs1, ATRIP and Ku80 proteins that are required for their interaction with ATM, ATR and DNA-PKcs, respectively.
 These motifs are essential not only for efficient recruitment of ATM, ATR and DNA-PKcs to sites of damage, but are also critical for ATM-, ATR- and DNA-PKcs-mediated signalling events that trigger cell cycle checkpoints and DNA repair.
 Our findings reveal that recruitment of these PIKKs to DNA lesions occurs by common mechanisms through an evolutionarily conserved motif, and provide direct evidence that PIKK recruitment is required for PIKK-dependent DNA-damage signalling.
Conserved modes of recruitment of ATM, ATR and DNA-PKcs to sites of DNA damage.
A combination of accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry has been used to clarify some new aspects of testosterone metabolism.
 The main pathway of testosterone oxidative metabolism by human liver microsomes is the formation of 1beta-, 2alpha-/beta-, 6beta-, 15beta-, and 16beta-hydroxytestosterones, mainly catalyzed by cytochromes P450 2C9, 2C19, and 3A4.
 We now report the first determination that 11beta-hydroxytestosterone (11beta-OHT) can also be formed by human liver microsomal fractions.
 The structures of five hydroxylated metabolites of testosterone (2beta-, 6beta-, 11beta-, 15beta-, and 16beta-OHT) and the C-17 oxidative metabolite androstenedione were determined by liquid chromatography with UV detection at 240 nm and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
 Corresponding results were obtained by high-performance liquid chromatography-AMS analysis of incubations of [4-14C]testosterone with human liver microsomes.
 6beta-Hydroxylation was always the dominant metabolic pathway, but 2beta-, 15beta-, and 16beta-OHT, and androstenedione were also formed.
 The previously undetected hydroxytestosterone, 11beta-OHT, was found to be a minor metabolite formed by human liver microsomal enzymes.
 It was formed more readily by CYP3A4 than by either CYP2C9 or CYP2C19.
 11beta-Hydroxylation was inhibited by ketoconazole (IC50 = 30 nM) at concentrations similar to the IC50 (36 nM) for 6beta-hydroxylation Therefore, CYP3A4 could be mainly responsible for testosterone 11beta-hydroxylation in the human liver.
 These findings identify human hepatic biotransformation of testosterone to 11beta-OHT as a previously unrecognized extra-adrenal metabolic pathway.
Characterization of testosterone 11 beta-hydroxylation catalyzed by human liver microsomal cytochromes P450.
In order to identify genetic polymorphisms and haplotype frequencies of CYP1A2 in a Japanese population, the enhancer and promoter regions, all the exons with their surrounding introns, and intron 1 were sequenced from genomic DNA from 250 Japanese subjects.
 Thirty-three polymorphisms were found, including 13 novel ones: 2 in the enhancer region, 5 in the exons, and 6 in the introns.
 The most common single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was -163C&gt;A (CYP1A2*1F allele) with a 0.628 frequency.
 In addition to six previously reported non-synonymous SNPs, three novel ones, 125C&gt;G (P42R, CYP1A2*15 allele, MPJ6_1A2032), 1130G&gt;A (R377Q, *16 allele, MPJ6_1A2033), and 1367G&gt;A (R456H, *8 allele, MPJ6_1A2019), were found with frequencies of 0.002, 0.002, and 0.004, respectively.
 No polymorphism was found in the known nuclear transcriptional factor-binding sites in the enhancer region.
 Based on linkage disequilibrium analysis, the CYP1A2 gene was analyzed as one haplotype block.
 Using the 33 detected polymorphisms, 14 haplotypes were unambiguously identified, and 17 haplotypes were inferred by aid of an expectation-maximization-based program.
 Among them, the second major haplotype CYP1A2*1L is composed of -3860G&gt;A (*1C allele), -2467delT (*1D allele), and -163C&gt;A (*1F allele).
 Network analysis suggested that relatively rare haplotypes were derived from three major haplotypes, *1A, *1M, and *1N in most cases.
 Our findings provide fundamental and useful information for genotyping CYP1A2 in the Japanese, and probably Asian populations.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms and haplotypes of CYP1A2 in a Japanese population.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) is a rare disorder characterized by attacks of involuntary movements brought on by stress, alcohol, or caffeine, but not by movement.
 An autosomal dominant form of this disorder was mapped to chromosome 2q33-36, and different missense mutations in exon 1 of the myofibrillogenesis regulator 1 (MR1) gene were identified recently in 2 kindreds.
&lt;h4&gt;Objectives&lt;/h4&gt;To describe studies on a new pedigree with PNKD, to explore the possibility of locus heterogeneity, and to further delineate the spectrum of mutations in MR1 in 2 families with PNKD.
&lt;h4&gt;Design, setting, and patients&lt;/h4&gt;All 10 exons of MR1 were sequenced in DNA from members of 2 pedigrees with autosomal dominant PNKD.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Different missense mutations in exon 1 of MR1 that cosegregate with disease were identified in each multiplex family.
 These single-nucleotide mutations predicted substitution of valine for alanine in residue 7 in one family and residue 9 in the other.
 The same mutations were found in the only 2 families previously published.
 Family history and haplotype analysis make it unlikely that the families with the same mutations are related.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The function of MR1 is unknown, but the 2 mutations identified in the 4 families with PNKD studied to date are predicted to disrupt the amino terminal alpha-helix suggesting that this region of the gene is critical for proper gene function under stressful conditions.
 Study of additional families will be important to determine whether analysis of a single exon (MR1 exon 1) is sufficient for genetic testing purposes.
Presence of alanine-to-valine substitutions in myofibrillogenesis regulator 1 in paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia: confirmation in 2 kindreds.
Correlations between genotype and pharmacological, histological, functional, and clinical phenotypes in malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS) is a subclinical pharmacogenetic disorder caused by an impairment of skeletal muscle calcium homeostasis in response to triggering agents.
 While in vitro contracture testing (IVCT) is the gold standard for defining MHS, molecular analysis is increasingly used to diagnosis MHS.
 Mutations associated with MHS have been reported in two genes: RYR1 and CACNA1S.
 Mutations in RYR1 are also responsible for central core disease (CCD), a myopathy that can be associated with a positive IVCT response.
 We report here the results of correlation studies performed with molecular, pharmacological, histological, and functional data obtained in 175 families (referred to as confirmed (129) or potential (46) MHS families).
 Extensive molecular analysis allowed us to identify a variant in 60% of the confirmed MHS families, and resulted in the characterization of 11 new variants in the RYR1 gene.
 Most mutations clustered to MH1 and MH2 domains of RYR1.
 Functional analysis allowed us to assign a causative role for seven MHS mutations that we propose to add to the panel of MHS mutations used for genetic testing.
 The use of genetic data to determine MHS status led to a 99.5% sensitivity for IVCT.
 IVCT-positive/mutation-negative diagnoses were analyzed not only in terms of specificity for IVCT, but also to assess the presence of a second MHS trait in families, and the genetic heterogeneity of the disease.
 Histological analyses revealed the presence of cores in more than 20% of muscle biopsies originating from 242 genotyped and tested MHS patients who did not present with clinical symptoms.
 This indicates that these patients must be considered as MHS patients with cores, and are clearly differentiated from CCD patients who have been tested positive for MHS.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Mutations in the RyR2-encoded cardiac ryanodine receptor/calcium release channel cause type 1 catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT1).
&lt;h4&gt;Objectives&lt;/h4&gt;Because CPVT and concealed long QT syndrome (LQTS) phenotypically mimic one other, we sought to determine the spectrum and prevalence of RyR2 mutations in a cohort of unrelated patients who were referred specifically for LQTS genetic testing.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and direct DNA sequencing, targeted mutational analysis of 23 RyR2 exons previously implicated in CPVT1 was performed on genomic DNA from 269 unrelated patients (180 females, average age at diagnosis 24 +/-17 years) who were referred to Mayo Clinic's Sudden Death Genomics Laboratory for LQTS genetic testing.
 Previously, comprehensive mutational analysis of the five LQTS-associated cardiac channel genes proved negative for this entire subset of patients now designated as "genotype-negative" LQTS referrals.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Fifteen distinct RyR2 mutations (14 missense, 1 duplication/insertion, 12 novel) were found in 17 (6.3%) of 269 patients.
 None of these mutations were present in 400 reference alleles.
 Two mutations localized to the calstabin-2 (FKBP12.6) binding domain.
 Upon review of the clinical records, the referral diagnosis for all 17 patients was "atypical" or "borderline" LQTS.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;Putative pathogenic CPVT1-causing mutations in RyR2 were detected in 6% of unrelated, genotype-negative LQTS referrals.
 These findings suggest that CPVT may be underrecognized among physicians referring patients because of a suspected channelopathy.
 A diagnosis of "atypical LQTS" may warrant consideration of CPVT and analysis of RyR2 if the standard cardiac channel gene screen for LQTS is negative.
Spectrum and prevalence of cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) mutations in a cohort of unrelated patients referred explicitly for long QT syndrome genetic testing.
In response to DNA damage or replication stress, the protein kinase ATR is activated and subsequently transduces genotoxic signals to cell cycle control and DNA repair machinery through phosphorylation of a number of downstream substrates.
 Very little is known about the molecular mechanism by which ATR is activated in response to genotoxic insults.
 In this report, we demonstrate that protein phosphatase 5 (PP5) is required for the ATR-mediated checkpoint activation.
 PP5 forms a complex with ATR in a genotoxic stress-inducible manner.
 Interference with the expression or the activity of PP5 leads to impairment of the ATR-mediated phosphorylation of hRad17 and Chk1 after UV or hydroxyurea treatment.
 Similar results are obtained in ATM-deficient cells, suggesting that the observed defect in checkpoint signaling is the consequence of impaired functional interaction between ATR and PP5.
 In cells exposed to UV irradiation, PP5 is required to elicit an appropriate S-phase checkpoint response.
 In addition, loss of PP5 leads to premature mitosis after hydroxyurea treatment.
 Interestingly, reduced PP5 activity exerts differential effects on the formation of intranuclear foci by ATR and replication protein A, implicating a functional role for PP5 in a specific stage of the checkpoint signaling pathway.
 Taken together, our results suggest that PP5 plays a critical role in the ATR-mediated checkpoint activation.
Protein phosphatase 5 is required for ATR-mediated checkpoint activation.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Minicore myopathy (multi-minicore disease [MmD]) is a congenital myopathy characterized by multifocal areas with loss of oxidative activity on muscle biopsy.
 MmD is clinically heterogeneous and distinct phenotypes have been associated with recessive mutations in either the selenoprotein N (SEPN1) or the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, also implicated in central core disease and malignant hyperthermia.
 External ophthalmoplegia is an additional finding in a subset of patients with MmD.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To clinically and genetically examine families with MmD and external ophthalmoplegia.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The authors investigated 11 affected individuals from 5 unrelated families.
 Clinical, histopathologic, and imaging studies were performed and RYR1 haplotyping and mutational analysis were carried out.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;All patients had multiple cores involving the entire fiber diameter on longitudinal sections.
 Weakness and wasting in the shoulder girdle, scoliosis, moderate respiratory impairment, and feeding difficulties were prominent.
 In contrast to SEPN1-related myopathies, soleus was more severely affected than gastrocnemius on muscle MRI.
 Haplotyping suggested linkage to the RYR1 locus in informative families and mutational screening revealed four novel RYR1 mutations in three unrelated families; in addition, functional haploinsufficiency was found in one allele of two recessive cases.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;These findings expand the phenotypic spectrum associated with mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene.
 Recessive mutations of domains commonly affected in malignant hyperthermia appear to be particularly prevalent in multi-minicore disease with external ophthalmoplegia and might suggest a different pathomechanism from that involved in central core disease.
Minicore myopathy with ophthalmoplegia caused by mutations in the ryanodine receptor type 1 gene.
Refinement of diagnostic assays for a probable causal mutation for porcine and human malignant hyperthermia.
The substitutions of T for C1843 in the porcine ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, which deletes a HinPI restriction endonuclease site and creates a HgiAI site, and of T for C1840 in human RYR1, which deletes a RsaI site, lead to Cys for Arg substitutions in the ryanodine receptors and are probable causal mutations for malignant hyperthermia (MH).
 To improve the restriction endonuclease assay of these sites, thereby providing an accurate, reliable diagnosis for MH, introns flanking the exon containing the mutation were sequenced, permitting identification and PCR amplification of a 659-bp porcine gene sequence that contains both constant and variant HgiAI sites and a 922-bp human gene sequence that contains both constant and variant RsaI sites.
 As a result, these PCR-amplified sequences contain constant internal controls for the reliable differentiation by restriction endonuclease digestion of normal, heterozygous, and MH genotypes.
Binding of a novel SMG-1-Upf1-eRF1-eRF3 complex (SURF) to the exon junction complex triggers Upf1 phosphorylation and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a surveillance mechanism that degrades mRNA containing premature termination codons (PTCs).
 In mammalian cells, recognition of PTCs requires translation and depends on the presence on the mRNA with the splicing-dependent exon junction complex (EJC).
 While it is known that a key event in the triggering of NMD is phosphorylation of the trans-acting factor, Upf1, by SMG-1, the relationship between Upf1 phosphorylation and PTC recognition remains undetermined.
 Here we show that SMG-1 binds to the mRNA-associated components of the EJC, Upf2, Upf3b, eIF4A3, Magoh, and Y14.
 Further, we describe a novel complex that contains the NMD factors SMG-1 and Upf1, and the translation termination release factors eRF1 and eRF3 (SURF).
 Importantly, an association between SURF and the EJC is required for SMG-1-mediated Upf1 phosphorylation and NMD.
 Thus, the SMG-1-mediated phosphorylation of Upf1 occurs on the association of SURF with EJC, which provides the link between the EJC and recognition of PTCs and triggers NMD.
Coffee, CYP1A2 genotype, and risk of myocardial infarction.
&lt;h4&gt;Context&lt;/h4&gt;The association between coffee intake and risk of myocardial infarction (MI) remains controversial.
 Coffee is a major source of caffeine, which is metabolized by the polymorphic cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) enzyme.
 Individuals who are homozygous for the CYP1A2*1A allele are "rapid" caffeine metabolizers, whereas carriers of the variant CYP1A2*1F are "slow" caffeine metabolizers.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To determine whether CYP1A2 genotype modifies the association between coffee consumption and risk of acute nonfatal MI.
&lt;h4&gt;Design, setting, and participants&lt;/h4&gt;Cases (n = 2014) with a first acute nonfatal MI and population-based controls (n = 2014) living in Costa Rica between 1994 and 2004, matched for age, sex, and area of residence, were genotyped by restriction fragment-length polymorphism polymerase chain reaction.
 A food frequency questionnaire was used to assess the intake of caffeinated coffee.
&lt;h4&gt;Main outcome measure&lt;/h4&gt;Relative risk of nonfatal MI associated with coffee intake, calculated using unconditional logistic regression.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Fifty-five percent of cases (n = 1114) and 54% of controls (n = 1082) were carriers of the slow *1F allele.
 For carriers of the slow *1F allele, the multivariate-adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of nonfatal MI associated with consuming less than 1, 1, 2 to 3, and 4 or more cups of coffee per day were 1.00 (reference), 0.99 (0.69-1.44), 1.36 (1.01-1.83), and 1.64 (1.14-2.34), respectively.
 Corresponding ORs (95% CIs) for individuals with the rapid *1A/*1A genotype were 1.00, 0.75 (0.51-1.12), 0.78 (0.56-1.09), and 0.99 (0.66-1.48) (P = .04 for gene x coffee interaction).
 For individuals younger than the median age of 59 years, the ORs (95% CIs) associated with consuming less than 1, 1, 2 to 3, or 4 or more cups of coffee per day were 1.00, 1.24 (0.71-2.18), 1.67 (1.08-2.60), and 2.33 (1.39-3.89), respectively, among carriers of the *1F allele.
 The corresponding ORs (95% CIs) for those with the *1A/*1A genotype were 1.00, 0.48 (0.26-0.87), 0.57 (0.35-0.95), and 0.83 (0.46-1.51).
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;Intake of coffee was associated with an increased risk of nonfatal MI only among individuals with slow caffeine metabolism, suggesting that caffeine plays a role in this association.
ATR is a key regulator of checkpoint responses to incompletely replicated and damaged DNA, but the mechanisms underlying control of its kinase activity are unknown.
 TopBP1, the vertebrate homolog of yeast Cut5/Dbp11, has dual roles in initiation of DNA replication and regulation of checkpoint responses.
 We show that recombinant TopBP1 induces a large increase in the kinase activity of both Xenopus and human ATR.
 The ATR-activating domain resides in a conserved segment of TopBP1 that is distinct from its numerous BRCT repeats.
 The isolated ATR-activating domain from TopBP1 induces ectopic activation of ATR-dependent signaling in both Xenopus egg extracts and human cells.
 Furthermore, Xenopus egg extracts containing a version of TopBP1 with an inactivating point mutation in the ATR-activating domain are defective in checkpoint regulation.
 These studies establish that activation of ATR by TopBP1 is a crucial step in the initiation of ATR-dependent signaling processes.
TopBP1 activates the ATR-ATRIP complex.
Analysis of the DNA sequence and duplication history of human chromosome 15.
Here we present a finished sequence of human chromosome 15, together with a high-quality gene catalogue.
 As chromosome 15 is one of seven human chromosomes with a high rate of segmental duplication, we have carried out a detailed analysis of the duplication structure of the chromosome.
 Segmental duplications in chromosome 15 are largely clustered in two regions, on proximal and distal 15q; the proximal region is notable because recombination among the segmental duplications can result in deletions causing Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes.
 Sequence analysis shows that the proximal and distal regions of 15q share extensive ancient similarity.
 Using a simple approach, we have been able to reconstruct many of the events by which the current duplication structure arose.
 We find that most of the intrachromosomal duplications seem to share a common ancestry.
 Finally, we demonstrate that some remaining gaps in the genome sequence are probably due to structural polymorphisms between haplotypes; this may explain a significant fraction of the gaps remaining in the human genome.
Myofibrillogenesis regulator 1 gene (MR-1) mutation in an Omani family with paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia.
Two recurrent missense mutations (c.20C&gt;T: A7V; c.26C&gt;T: A9V) in the gene encoding the myofibrillogenesis regulator 1 (MR-1) have been shown to cause autosomal dominant paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) in 13 families of primarily European ancestry.
 Here we report an Omani PNKD family with seven affected family members and autosomal dominant inheritance.
 Our linkage analysis provided consistent positional evidence that the MR-1 gene could be the responsible disease gene.
 Sequence analysis identified a MR-1 missense mutation (c.20C&gt;T; A7V) in the affected family members, whereas it was not present in five unaffected family members and 129 population controls.
 Taking into account that previous haplotype analyses did not reveal evidence for common founders among several PNKD families, our present findings strengthen three implications: (1) autosomal dominant PNKD seems to be a homogenous disorder, for which the MR-1 gene is the major disease gene; (2) mainly two recurrent MR-1 missense mutations (57% V7, 43% V9) account for the genetic variance of familial PNKD; (3) it supports current evidence that some of the recurrent MR-1 mutations may have arisen independently by de novo mutation at functionally convergent key sites of the brain-specific MR-1L isoform.
The DNA sequence and biological annotation of human chromosome 1.
The reference sequence for each human chromosome provides the framework for understanding genome function, variation and evolution.
 Here we report the finished sequence and biological annotation of human chromosome 1.
 Chromosome 1 is gene-dense, with 3,141 genes and 991 pseudogenes, and many coding sequences overlap.
 Rearrangements and mutations of chromosome 1 are prevalent in cancer and many other diseases.
 Patterns of sequence variation reveal signals of recent selection in specific genes that may contribute to human fitness, and also in regions where no function is evident.
 Fine-scale recombination occurs in hotspots of varying intensity along the sequence, and is enriched near genes.
 These and other studies of human biology and disease encoded within chromosome 1 are made possible with the highly accurate annotated sequence, as part of the completed set of chromosome sequences that comprise the reference human genome.
A probability-based approach for high-throughput protein phosphorylation analysis and site localization.
Data analysis and interpretation remain major logistical challenges when attempting to identify large numbers of protein phosphorylation sites by nanoscale reverse-phase liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (Supplementary Figure 1 online).
 In this report we address challenges that are often only addressable by laborious manual validation, including data set error, data set sensitivity and phosphorylation site localization.
 We provide a large-scale phosphorylation data set with a measured error rate as determined by the target-decoy approach, we demonstrate an approach to maximize data set sensitivity by efficiently distracting incorrect peptide spectral matches (PSMs), and we present a probability-based score, the Ascore, that measures the probability of correct phosphorylation site localization based on the presence and intensity of site-determining ions in MS/MS spectra.
 We applied our methods in a fully automated fashion to nocodazole-arrested HeLa cell lysate where we identified 1,761 nonredundant phosphorylation sites from 491 proteins with a peptide false-positive rate of 1.3%.
Clinical characteristics of paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia in Serbian family with Myofibrillogenesis regulator 1 gene mutation.
The aim of this study was to describe the clinical features of a large Serbian family with paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) and one of the two previously described mutations in the Myofibrillogenesis regulator 1 gene (MR-1), which causes an alanine-to-valine substitution at position 9.
 In 5 examined out of 12 affected family members, attacks of dyskinesias appeared in the first 6 months of life.
 Both frequency and severity of attacks showed an age-dependent incremental-decremental pattern with a peak between 13 to 15 years of age.
 They were frequently precipitated by stress, caffeine, fever, hunger, tiredness, as well as abrupt changes in temperature.
 Three of our patients differentiated two types of attacks: mild (120-180 minutes), with a predominance of functionally insignificant choreoathetoid movements, and severe ( approximately 15-30 minutes), characterized by disabling dystonic and choreic movements of the extremities, trunk, and face.
 Sleep was the most reliable factor to discontinue an attack.
 This Serbian family further demonstrates that recurrent MR-1 mutations are associated with PNKD worldwide, which will affect genetic testing.
Inheritance of a novel RYR1 mutation in a family with myotonic dystrophy type 1.
Central core disease (CCD) is an autosomal-dominant congenital myopathy, with muscle weakness and malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility.
 We identified two of nine Brazilian CCD families carrying two mutations in the RYR1 gene.
 The heterozygous parents were clinically asymptomatic, and patients were mildly affected, differing from the few autosomal-recessive cases described previously.
 Recessive inheritance in CCD may therefore be more common than previously appreciated, which has important implications for genetic counseling and MH prevention in affected families.
Central core disease due to recessive mutations in RYR1 gene: is it more common than described?
Adaptations for the oxidation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons exhibited by the structure of human P450 1A2.
Microsomal cytochrome P450 family 1 enzymes play prominent roles in xenobiotic detoxication and procarcinogen activation.
 P450 1A2 is the principal cytochrome P450 family 1 enzyme expressed in human liver and participates extensively in drug oxidations.
 This enzyme is also of great importance in the bioactivation of mutagens, including the N-hydroxylation of arylamines.
 P450-catalyzed reactions involve a wide range of substrates, and this versatility is reflected in a structural diversity evident in the active sites of available P450 structures.
 Here, we present the structure of human P450 1A2 in complex with the inhibitor alpha-naphthoflavone, determined to a resolution of 1.95 A.
 alpha-Naphthoflavone is bound in the active site above the distal surface of the heme prosthetic group.
 The structure reveals a compact, closed active site cavity that is highly adapted for the positioning and oxidation of relatively large, planar substrates.
 This unique topology is clearly distinct from known active site architectures of P450 family 2 and 3 enzymes and demonstrates how P450 family 1 enzymes have evolved to catalyze efficiently polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon oxidation.
 This report provides the first structure of a microsomal P450 from family 1 and offers a template to study further structure-function relationships of alternative substrates and other cytochrome P450 family 1 members.
Cancers arise owing to mutations in a subset of genes that confer growth advantage.
 The availability of the human genome sequence led us to propose that systematic resequencing of cancer genomes for mutations would lead to the discovery of many additional cancer genes.
 Here we report more than 1,000 somatic mutations found in 274 megabases (Mb) of DNA corresponding to the coding exons of 518 protein kinase genes in 210 diverse human cancers.
 There was substantial variation in the number and pattern of mutations in individual cancers reflecting different exposures, DNA repair defects and cellular origins.
 Most somatic mutations are likely to be 'passengers' that do not contribute to oncogenesis.
 However, there was evidence for 'driver' mutations contributing to the development of the cancers studied in approximately 120 genes.
 Systematic sequencing of cancer genomes therefore reveals the evolutionary diversity of cancers and implicates a larger repertoire of cancer genes than previously anticipated.
Patterns of somatic mutation in human cancer genomes.
ATM and ATR substrate analysis reveals extensive protein networks responsive to DNA damage.
Cellular responses to DNA damage are mediated by a number of protein kinases, including ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) and ATR (ATM and Rad3-related).
 The outlines of the signal transduction portion of this pathway are known, but little is known about the physiological scope of the DNA damage response (DDR).
 We performed a large-scale proteomic analysis of proteins phosphorylated in response to DNA damage on consensus sites recognized by ATM and ATR and identified more than 900 regulated phosphorylation sites encompassing over 700 proteins.
 Functional analysis of a subset of this data set indicated that this list is highly enriched for proteins involved in the DDR.
 This set of proteins is highly interconnected, and we identified a large number of protein modules and networks not previously linked to the DDR.
 This database paints a much broader landscape for the DDR than was previously appreciated and opens new avenues of investigation into the responses to DNA damage in mammals.
A substitution of cysteine for arginine 614 in the ryanodine receptor is potentially causative of human malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a devastating, potentially lethal response to anesthetics that occurs in genetically predisposed individuals.
 The skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene has been linked to porcine and human MH.
 Furthermore, a Cys for Arg substitution tightly linked to, and potentially causative of, porcine MH has been identified in the ryanodine receptor.
 Analysis of 35 human families predisposed to malignant hyperthermia has revealed the presence, and cosegregation with phenotype, of the corresponding substitution in a single family.
 This substitution, by analogy to the findings in pig, may be causal for predisposition to MH in this family.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;With the completion of the human genome sequence the functional analysis and characterization of the encoded proteins has become the next urging challenge in the post-genome era.
 The lack of comprehensive ORFeome resources has thus far hampered systematic applications by protein gain-of-function analysis.
 Gene and ORF coverage with full-length ORF clones thus needs to be extended.
 In combination with a unique and versatile cloning system, these will provide the tools for genome-wide systematic functional analyses, to achieve a deeper insight into complex biological processes.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Here we describe the generation of a full-ORF clone resource of human genes applying the Gateway cloning technology (Invitrogen).
 A pipeline for efficient cloning and sequencing was developed and a sample tracking database was implemented to streamline the clone production process targeting more than 2,200 different ORFs.
 In addition, a robust cloning strategy was established, permitting the simultaneous generation of two clone variants that contain a particular ORF with as well as without a stop codon by the implementation of only one additional working step into the cloning procedure.
 Up to 92 % of the targeted ORFs were successfully amplified by PCR and more than 93 % of the amplicons successfully cloned.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;The German cDNA Consortium ORFeome resource currently consists of more than 3,800 sequence-verified entry clones representing ORFs, cloned with and without stop codon, for about 1,700 different gene loci.
 177 splice variants were cloned representing 121 of these genes.
 The entry clones have been used to generate over 5,000 different expression constructs, providing the basis for functional profiling applications.
 As a member of the recently formed international ORFeome collaboration we substantially contribute to generating and providing a whole genome human ORFeome collection in a unique cloning system that is made freely available in the community.
The full-ORF clone resource of the German cDNA consortium.
Different forms of ventricular arrhythmias have been linked to mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR)2, but the molecular basis for this phenotypic heterogeneity is unknown.
 We have recently demonstrated that an enhanced sensitivity to luminal Ca(2+) and an increased propensity for spontaneous Ca(2+) release or store-overload-induced Ca(2+) release (SOICR) are common defects of RyR2 mutations associated with catecholaminergic polymorphic or bidirectional ventricular tachycardia.
 Here, we investigated the properties of a unique RyR2 mutation associated with catecholaminergic idiopathic ventricular fibrillation, A4860G.
 Single-channel analyses revealed that, unlike all other disease-linked RyR2 mutations characterized previously, the A4860G mutation diminished the response of RyR2 to activation by luminal Ca(2+), but had little effect on the sensitivity of the channel to activation by cytosolic Ca(2+).
 This specific impact of the A4860G mutation indicates that the luminal Ca(2+) activation of RyR2 is distinct from its cytosolic Ca(2+) activation.
 Stable, inducible HEK293 cells expressing the A4860G mutant showed caffeine-induced Ca(2+) release but exhibited no SOICR.
 Importantly, HL-1 cardiac cells transfected with the A4860G mutant displayed attenuated SOICR activity compared with cells transfected with RyR2 WT.
 These observations provide the first evidence that a loss of luminal Ca(2+) activation and SOICR activity can cause ventricular fibrillation and sudden death.
 These findings also indicate that although suppressing enhanced SOICR is a promising antiarrhythmic strategy, its oversuppression can also lead to arrhythmias.
Loss of luminal Ca(2+) activation in the cardiac ryanodine receptor is associated with ventricular fibrillation and sudden death.
Mutations of the ryanodine receptor cause dominant and recessive forms of congenital myopathies with cores.
 Quantitative defects of RYR1 have been reported in families presenting with recessive forms of the disease and epigenic regulation has been recently proposed to explain potential maternal monoallelic silencing of the RYR1 gene.
 We investigated nine families presenting with a recessive form of the disease and showing a quantitative defect of RYR1 expression.
 Genetic analysis allowed the identification of a mutation on both alleles of the RYR1 gene for all patients, 15 being novel variants.
 We evidenced for all patients an alteration of the expression of the RYR1 gene caused by amorphic mutations responsible either for mRNA or protein instability.
 In seven families the variant present on the second allele was a missense mutation.
 In the remaining two families the second variant led to a hypomorphic expression of the RYR1 gene and was associated with a severe neonatal phenotype, pointing out the minimal amount of RYR1 needed for skeletal muscle function.
 Noticeably, a novel additional exon 3b was characterized in the most severely affected cases.
 This study showed that all cases presenting with a quantitative defect of RYR1 expression in our panel of patients affected by recessive core myopathies were caused by the presence of one recessive null allele and that variability of the phenotype depended on the nature of the mutation present on the second allele.
 Our study also indicated that presence of a second mutation must be investigated in sporadic cases or in dominant cases presenting with a familial clinical variability.
Null mutations causing depletion of the type 1 ryanodine receptor (RYR1) are commonly associated with recessive structural congenital myopathies with cores.
During exercise, defects in calcium (Ca2+) release have been proposed to impair muscle function.
 Here, we show that during exercise in mice and humans, the major Ca2+ release channel required for excitation-contraction coupling (ECC) in skeletal muscle, the ryanodine receptor (RyR1), is progressively PKA-hyperphosphorylated, S-nitrosylated, and depleted of the phosphodiesterase PDE4D3 and the RyR1 stabilizing subunit calstabin1 (FKBP12), resulting in "leaky" channels that cause decreased exercise tolerance in mice.
 Mice with skeletal muscle-specific calstabin1 deletion or PDE4D deficiency exhibited significantly impaired exercise capacity.
 A small molecule (S107) that prevents depletion of calstabin1 from the RyR1 complex improved force generation and exercise capacity, reduced Ca2+-dependent neutral protease calpain activity and plasma creatine kinase levels.
 Taken together, these data suggest a possible mechanism by which Ca2+ leak via calstabin1-depleted RyR1 channels leads to defective Ca2+ signaling, muscle damage, and impaired exercise capacity.
Remodeling of ryanodine receptor complex causes 'leaky' channels: a molecular mechanism for decreased exercise capacity.
Cep164 is a mediator protein required for the maintenance of genomic stability through modulation of MDC1, RPA, and CHK1.
The activation of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ATM/Rad3-related (ATR) kinases triggers a diverse cellular response including the initiation of DNA damage-induced cell cycle checkpoints.
 Mediator of DNA Damage Checkpoint protein, MDC1, and H2AX are chromatin remodeling factors required for the recruitment of DNA repair proteins to the DNA damage sites.
 We identified a novel mediator protein, Cep164 (KIAA1052), that interacts with both ATR and ATM.
 Cep164 is phosphorylated upon replication stress, ultraviolet radiation (UV), and ionizing radiation (IR).
 Ser186 of Cep164 is phosphorylated by ATR/ATM in vitro and in vivo.
 The phosphorylation of Ser186 is not affected by RPA knockdown but is severely hampered by MDC1 knockdown.
 siRNA-mediated silencing of Cep164 significantly reduces DNA damage-induced phosphorylation of RPA, H2AX, MDC1, CHK2, and CHK1, but not NBS1.
 Analyses of Cep164 knockdown cells demonstrate a critical role of Cep164 in G2/M checkpoint and nuclear divisions.
 These findings reveal that Cep164 is a key player in the DNA damage-activated signaling cascade.
Novel RYR1 missense mutation causes core rod myopathy.
Large-scale phosphoproteome analysis of human liver tissue by enrichment and fractionation of phosphopeptides with strong anion exchange chromatography.
The mixture of phosphopeptides enriched from proteome samples are very complex.
 To reduce the complexity it is necessary to fractionate the phosphopeptides.
 However, conventional enrichment methods typically only enrich phosphopeptides but not fractionate phosphopeptides.
 In this study, the application of strong anion exchange (SAX) chromatography for enrichment and fractionation of phosphopeptides was presented.
 It was found that phosphopeptides were highly enriched by SAX and majority of unmodified peptides did not bind onto SAX.
 Compared with Fe(3+) immobilized metal affinity chromatography (Fe(3+)-IMAC), almost double phosphopeptides were identified from the same sample when only one fraction was generated by SAX.
 SAX and Fe(3+)-IMAC showed the complementarity in enrichment and identification of phosphopeptides.
 It was also demonstrated that SAX have the ability to fractionate phosphopeptides under gradient elution based on their different interaction with SAX adsorbent.
 SAX was further applied to enrich and fractionate phosphopeptides in tryptic digest of proteins extracted from human liver tissue adjacent to tumorous region for phosphoproteome profiling.
 This resulted in the highly confident identification of 274 phosphorylation sites from 305 unique phosphopeptides corresponding to 168 proteins at false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.96%.
Cytochrome P450 (P450) is a super-family of drug metabolizing enzymes.
 P450 enzymes have dual function; they can metabolize drugs to pharmacologically inactive metabolites facilitating their excretion or biotransform them to pharmacologically active metabolites which may have longer half-life than the parent drug.
 The variable pharmacological response to psychoactive drugs typically seen in population groups is often not accountable by considering dissimilarities in hepatic metabolism.
 Metabolism in brain specific nuclei may play a role in pharmacological modulation of drugs acting on the CNS and help explain some of the diverse response to these drugs seen in patient population.
 P450 enzymes are also present in brain where drug metabolism can take place and modify therapeutic action of drugs at the site of action.
 We have earlier demonstrated an intrinsic difference in the biotransformation of alprazolam (ALP) in brain and liver, relatively more alpha-hydroxy alprazolam (alpha-OHALP) is formed in brain as compared to liver.
 In the present study we show that recombinant CYP3A43 metabolizes ALP to both alpha-OHALP and 4-hydroxy alprazolam (4-OHALP) while CYP3A4 metabolizes ALP predominantly to its inactive metabolite, 4-OHALP.
 The expression of CYP3A43 mRNA in human brain samples correlates with formation of relatively higher levels of alpha-OH ALP indicating that individuals who express higher levels of CYP3A43 in the brain would generate larger amounts of alpha-OHALP.
 Further, the expression of CYP3A43 was relatively higher in brain as compared to liver across different ethnic populations.
 Since CYP3A enzymes play a prominent role in the metabolism of drugs, the higher expression of CYP3A43 would generate metabolite profile of drugs differentially in human brain and thus impact the pharmacodynamics of psychoactive drugs at the site of action.
Drug metabolism in human brain: high levels of cytochrome P4503A43 in brain and metabolism of anti-anxiety drug alprazolam to its active metabolite.
In heart and skeletal muscle an S100 protein family member, S100A1, binds to the ryanodine receptor (RyR) and promotes Ca(2+) release.
 Using competition binding assays, we further characterized this system in skeletal muscle and showed that Ca(2+)-S100A1 competes with Ca(2+)-calmodulin (CaM) for the same binding site on RyR1.
 In addition, the NMR structure was determined for Ca(2+)-S100A1 bound to a peptide derived from this CaM/S100A1 binding domain, a region conserved in RyR1 and RyR2 and termed RyRP12 (residues 3616-3627 in human RyR1).
 Examination of the S100A1-RyRP12 complex revealed residues of the helical RyRP12 peptide (Lys-3616, Trp-3620, Lys-3622, Leu-3623, Leu-3624, and Lys-3626) that are involved in favorable hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions with Ca(2+)-S100A1.
 These same residues were shown previously to be important for RyR1 binding to Ca(2+)-CaM.
 A model for regulating muscle contraction is presented in which Ca(2+)-S100A1 and Ca(2+)-CaM compete directly for the same binding site on the ryanodine receptor.
S100A1 and calmodulin compete for the same binding site on ryanodine receptor.
A quantitative atlas of mitotic phosphorylation.
The eukaryotic cell division cycle is characterized by a sequence of orderly and highly regulated events resulting in the duplication and separation of all cellular material into two newly formed daughter cells.
 Protein phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) drives this cycle.
 To gain further insight into how phosphorylation regulates the cell cycle, we sought to identify proteins whose phosphorylation is cell cycle regulated.
 Using stable isotope labeling along with a two-step strategy for phosphopeptide enrichment and high mass accuracy mass spectrometry, we examined protein phosphorylation in a human cell line arrested in the G(1) and mitotic phases of the cell cycle.
 We report the identification of &gt;14,000 different phosphorylation events, more than half of which, to our knowledge, have not been described in the literature, along with relative quantitative data for the majority of these sites.
 We observed &gt;1,000 proteins with increased phosphorylation in mitosis including many known cell cycle regulators.
 The majority of sites on regulated phosphopeptides lie in [S/T]P motifs, the minimum required sequence for CDKs, suggesting that many of the proteins may be CDK substrates.
 Analysis of non-proline site-containing phosphopeptides identified two unique motifs that suggest there are at least two undiscovered mitotic kinases.
Kinase-selective enrichment enables quantitative phosphoproteomics of the kinome across the cell cycle.
Protein kinases are pivotal regulators of cell signaling that modulate each other's functions and activities through site-specific phosphorylation events.
 These key regulatory modifications have not been studied comprehensively, because low cellular abundance of kinases has resulted in their underrepresentation in previous phosphoproteome studies.
 Here, we combine kinase-selective affinity purification with quantitative mass spectrometry to analyze the cell-cycle regulation of protein kinases.
 This proteomics approach enabled us to quantify 219 protein kinases from S and M phase-arrested human cancer cells.
 We identified more than 1000 phosphorylation sites on protein kinases.
 Intriguingly, half of all kinase phosphopeptides were upregulated in mitosis.
 Our data reveal numerous unknown M phase-induced phosphorylation sites on kinases with established mitotic functions.
 We also find potential phosphorylation networks involving many protein kinases not previously implicated in mitotic progression.
 These results provide a vastly extended knowledge base for functional studies on kinases and their regulation through site-specific phosphorylation.
King-denborough syndrome caused by a novel mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene.
ABC transporters, cytochromes P450 and their main transcription factors: expression at the human blood-brain barrier.
We have established the expression patterns of the genes encoding ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters and cytochromes P450 (CYPs) at the adult human blood-brain barrier (BBB) using isolated brain microvessels and cortex biopsies from patients with epilepsia or glioma.
 Microves synaptophysin (neurons) and neuron-glial antigen 2 (NG2) (pericytes).
 ABCG2 [breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP)] and ABCB1 (MDR1) were the main ABC transporter genes expressed in microvessels, with 20 times more ABCG2 and 25 times more ABCB1 in microvessels than in the cortex.
 The CYP1B1 isoform represented over 80% of all the CYPs genes detected in microvessels.
 There were 14 times more CYP1B1 in microvessels than in the cortex, showing that CYP1B1 is mainly expressed at the BBB.
 p-glycoprotein (ABCB1), BCRP (ABCG2) and CYP1B1 proteins were found in microvessels by western blotting.
 The expression of genes encoding three transcription factors [pregnane xenobiotic receptor (PXR), constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)] was also investigated.
 The AhR gene, involved in the regulation of CYP1B1 expression, was highly expressed in brain microvessels, whereas PXR and CAR genes were almost undetected.
 This detailed pattern of ABC and CYPs gene expression at the human BBB provides useful information for understanding how their substrates enter the brain.
CYP3A4 ubiquitination by gp78 (the tumor autocrine motility factor receptor, AMFR) and CHIP E3 ligases.
Human liver CYP3A4 is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-anchored hemoprotein responsible for the metabolism of &gt;50% of clinically prescribed drugs.
 After heterologous expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, it is degraded via the ubiquitin (Ub)-dependent 26S proteasomal pathway that utilizes Ubc7p/Cue1p, but none of the canonical Ub-ligases (E3s) Hrd1p/Hrd3p, Doa10p, and Rsp5p involved in ER-associated degradation (ERAD).
 To identify an Ub-ligase capable of ubiquitinating CYP3A4, we examined various in vitro reconstituted mammalian E3 systems, using purified and functionally characterized recombinant components.
 Of these, the cytosolic domain of the ER-protein gp78, also known as the tumor autocrine motility factor receptor (AMFR), an UBC7-dependent polytopic RING-finger E3, effectively ubiquitinated CYP3A4 in vitro, as did the UbcH5a-dependent cytosolic E3 CHIP.
 CYP3A4 immunoprecipitation coupled with anti-Ub immunoblotting analyses confirmed its ubiquitination in these reconstituted systems.
 Thus, both UBC7/gp78 and UbcH5a/CHIP may be involved in CYP3A4 ERAD, although their relative physiological contribution remains to be established.
Paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia is caused by mutations of the MR-1 mitochondrial targeting sequence.
Paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) is an autosomal-dominant movement disorder characterized by attacks of dystonia, chorea and athetosis.
 Myofibrillogenesis regulator-1 (MR-1), the gene responsible for PNKD, is transcribed into three alternatively spliced forms: long (MR-1L), medium (MR-1M) and small (MR-1S).
 Two mutations, A7V and A9V, were previously discovered in the N-terminal region common to MR-1L and MR-1S.
 We now found a third mutation, A33P, in a new PNKD patient in the same region.
 Contrary to previous reports, we show here that the mutation-free MR-1M is localized in the Golgi apparatus, ER and plasma membrane, whereas both MR-1L and MR-1S isoforms are mitochondrial proteins, imported into the organelle thanks to a 39 amino acid-long, N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS).
 The MTS, which contains all three PNKD mutations, is then cleaved off the mature proteins before their insertion in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
 Therefore, mature MR-1S and MR-1L of PNKD patients are identical to those of normal subjects.
 We found no difference in import efficiency and protein maturation between wild-type and mutant MR-1 variants.
 These results indicate that PNKD is due to a novel disease mechanism based on a deleterious action of the MTS.
Increasing the number of diagnostic mutations in malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by abnormal calcium homeostasis in skeletal muscle in response to triggering agents.
 Today, genetic investigations on ryanodine receptor type 1 (RYR1) gene and alpha1 subunit of the dihydropyridine receptor (DHPR) (CACNA1S) gene have improved the procedures associated with MH diagnosis.
 In approximately 50% of MH cases a causative RYR1 mutation was found.
 Molecular genetic testing based on RYR1 mutations for MH diagnosis is challenging, because the causative mutations, most of which are private, are distributed throughout the RYR1 gene.
 A more comprehensive genetic testing procedure is needed.
 Therefore, we aim to expand the genetic information related to MH and to evaluate the effect of mutations on the MH phenotype.
 Performing an in-depth mutation screening of the RYR1 transcript sequence in 36 unrelated MH susceptible (MHS) patients, we identified 17 novel, five rare, and eight non-disease-causing variants in 23 patients.
 The 13 remaining MHS patients presented no known variants, neither in RYR1 nor in the CACNA1S binding regions to RYR1.
 The 17 novel variants were found to affect highly conserved amino acids and were absent in 100 controls.
 Excellent genotype-phenotype correlations were found by investigating 21 MHS families-a total of 186 individuals.
 Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) lymphoblastoid cells carrying four of these novel mutations showed abnormal calcium homeostasis.
 The results of this study contribute to the establishment of a robust genetic testing procedure for MH diagnosis.
Cytochrome P450 (P450) enzymes and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters modulate the transport and metabolism of both endogenous and exogenous substrates and could play crucial roles in the human brain.
 In this study, we report the transcript expression profile of seven ABC transporters (ABCB1, ABCC1-C5, and ABCG2), 24 P450s (CYP1, CYP2, and CYP3 families and CYP46A1), and 14 related transcription factors [aryl hydrocarbon receptor, nuclear receptor (NR)1I2/pregnane X receptor, NR1I3/constitutive androstane receptor and NR1C/peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor, NR1H/liver X receptor, NR2B/retinoid X receptor, and NR3A/estrogen receptor subfamilies] in the whole brain, the dura mater, and 17 different encephalic areas.
 In addition, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry analysis were used to characterize the distribution of the P450s at the cellular and subcellular levels in some brain regions.
 Our results show the presence of a large variety of xenobiotic transporters and metabolizing enzymes in human brain and show for the first time their apparent selective distribution in different cerebral regions.
 The most abundant transporters were ABCC5 and ABCG2, which, interestingly, had a higher mRNA expression in the brain compared with that found in the liver.
 CYP46A1, CYP2J2, CYP2U1, CYP1B1, CYP2E1, and CYP2D6 represented more than 90% of the total P450 and showed selective distribution in different brain regions.
 Their presence in both microsomal and mitochondrial fractions was shown both in neuronal and glial cells in several brain areas.
 Thus, our study shows key enzymes of cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism to be present in the human brain and provides novel information of importance for elucidation of enzymes responsible for normal and pathological processes in the human brain.
Xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes and transporters in the normal human brain: regional and cellular mapping as a basis for putative roles in cerebral function.
Lys-N and trypsin cover complementary parts of the phosphoproteome in a refined SCX-based approach.
The analysis of proteome-wide phosphorylation events is still a major analytical challenge because of the enormous complexity of protein phosphorylation networks.
 In this work, we evaluate the complementarity of Lys-N, Lys-C, and trypsin with regard to their ability to contribute to the global analysis of the phosphoproteome.
 A refined version of low-pH strong cation exchange was used to efficiently separate N-terminally acetylated, phosphorylated, and nonmodified peptides.
 A total of 5036 nonredundant phosphopeptides could be identified with a false discovery rate of &lt;1% from 1 mg of protein using a combination of the three enzymes.
 Our data revealed that the overlap between the phosphopeptide data sets generated with different proteases was marginal, whereas the overlap between two similarly generated tryptic data sets was found to be at least 4 times higher.
 In this way, the parallel use of Lys-N and trypsin enabled a 72% increase in the number of detected phosphopeptides as compared to trypsin alone, whereas a trypsin replicate experiment only led to a 25% increase.
 Thus, when focusing solely on the trypsin and Lys-N data, we identified 4671 nonredundant phosphopeptides.
 Further analysis of the detected sites showed that the Lys-N and trypsin data sets were enriched in significantly different phosphorylation motifs, further evidencing that multiprotease approaches are very valuable in phosphoproteome analyses.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a surveillance mechanism that detects and degrades mRNAs containing premature translation termination codons (PTCs).
 SMG-1 and Upf1 transiently form a surveillance complex termed "SURF" that includes eRF1 and eRF3 on post-spliced mRNAs during recognition of PTC.
 If an exon junction complex (EJC) exists downstream from the SURF complex, SMG-1 phosphorylates Upf1, the step that is a rate-limiting for NMD.
 We provide evidence of an association between the SURF complex and the ribosome in association with mRNPs, and we suggest that the SURF complex functions as a translation termination complex during NMD.
 We identified SMG-8 and SMG-9 as novel subunits of the SMG-1 complex.
 SMG-8 and SMG-9 suppress SMG-1 kinase activity in the isolated SMG-1 complex and are involved in NMD in both mammals and nematodes.
 SMG-8 recruits SMG-1 to the mRNA surveillance complex, and inactivation of SMG-8 induces accumulation of a ribosome:Upf1:eRF1:eRF3:EJC complex on mRNP, which physically bridges the ribosome and EJC through eRF1, eRF3, and Upf1.
 These results not only reveal the regulatory mechanism of SMG-1 kinase but also reveal the sequential remodeling of the ribosome:SURF complex to the predicted DECID (DECay InDucing) complex, a ribosome:SURF:EJC complex, as a mechanism of in vivo PTC discrimination.
SMG-8 and SMG-9, two novel subunits of the SMG-1 complex, regulate remodeling of the mRNA surveillance complex during nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
Cardiac ryanodine receptor phosphorylation by CaM Kinase II: keeping the balance right.
Phosphorylation of the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) is a key mechanism regulating sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ release.
 Differences in opinion have arisen over the importance assigned to specific phosphorylation sites on RyR2, over the kinase (s) suggested to directly phosphorylate RyR2 and surrounding the possibility that altered phosphorylation of RyR2 is associated with contractile dysfunction observed in heart failure.
 Ca2+/calmodulin dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) can phosphorylate RyR2 and modulate its activity.
 This phosphorylation positively modulates cardiac inotropic function but in extreme situations such as heart failure, elevated CaMKII activity can adversely increase Ca2+ release from the SR and lead to arrhythmogenesis.
 Although other kinases can phosphorylate RyR2, most notably cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), evidence for a key role of CaMKII in mediating RyR2-dependent Ca2+ release is emerging.
 Future challenges include (i) fully identifying mechanisms of CaMKII interaction with the RyR2 complex and (ii) given the ubiquitous expression of CaMKII, developing selective strategies to modulate RyR2-targeted CaMKII activity and allow improved understanding of its role in normal and diseased heart.
Lysine acetylation is a reversible posttranslational modification of proteins and plays a key role in regulating gene expression.
 Technological limitations have so far prevented a global analysis of lysine acetylation's cellular roles.
 We used high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify 3600 lysine acetylation sites on 1750 proteins and quantified acetylation changes in response to the deacetylase inhibitors suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid and MS-275.
 Lysine acetylation preferentially targets large macromolecular complexes involved in diverse cellular processes, such as chromatin remodeling, cell cycle, splicing, nuclear transport, and actin nucleation.
 Acetylation impaired phosphorylation-dependent interactions of 14-3-3 and regulated the yeast cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28.
 Our data demonstrate that the regulatory scope of lysine acetylation is broad and comparable with that of other major posttranslational modifications.
Lysine acetylation targets protein complexes and co-regulates major cellular functions.
Functional analysis of ryanodine receptor type 1 p.R2508C mutation in exon 47.
&lt;h4&gt;Purpose&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder of intracellular calcium homeostasis with an autosomal dominant inheritance.
 Most of the reported mutations in exon 47 were identified in Asian patients.
 However, no functional analysis of p.R2508C has been performed.
 We therefore conducted a functional analysis of the mutation by altering calcium homeostasis in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells transfected with the p.R2508C mutation in exon 47 of the ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1).
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The entire RYR1 coding region from genomic DNA, which was extracted from the biopsied muscle specimens of two patients, was sequenced.
 The p.R2508C mutation was introduced into rabbit RYR1 cDNA, and wild-type or p.R2508C mutant cDNAs were transfected into HEK-293 cells.
 Using the calcium-sensitive probe Fura 2, we utilized the 340/380 nm ratio to analyze alterations in calcium homeostasis following treatment with caffeine and 4-chloro-m-cresol (4CmC).
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Genetic analysis revealed a C--&gt;T point mutation of RYR1 exon 47 at position 7522, resulting in an amino acid exchange of arginine for cysteine at amino acid 2508.
 The half-maximal activation concentrations (EC(50)) of caffeine and 4CmC for HEK-293 cells transfected with the p.R2508C mutation were 1.86 +/- 0.23 mM and 73.14 +/-19.44 microM, while those for wild-type RYR1 were 2.62 +/-0.23 mM and 179.31 +/-35.23 microM, respectively.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;We demonstrated that the transfected RYR1 mutant was more sensitive to caffeine and 4CmC than wildtype RYR1.
 These findings suggest that the p.R2508C mutation may be pathogenetic for susceptibility to MH.
Protein phosphorylation events during T cell receptor (TCR) signaling control the formation of complexes among proteins proximal to the TCR, the activation of kinase cascades, and the activation of transcription factors; however, the mode and extent of the influence of phosphorylation in coordinating the diverse phenomena associated with T cell activation are unclear.
 Therefore, we used the human Jurkat T cell leukemia cell line as a model system and performed large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomic analyses of TCR signaling.
 We identified 10,665 unique phosphorylation sites, of which 696 showed TCR-responsive changes.
 In addition, we analyzed broad trends in phosphorylation data sets to uncover underlying mechanisms associated with T cell activation.
 We found that, upon stimulation of the TCR, phosphorylation events extensively targeted protein modules involved in all of the salient phenomena associated with T cell activation: patterning of surface proteins, endocytosis of the TCR, formation of the F-actin cup, inside-out activation of integrins, polarization of microtubules, production of cytokines, and alternative splicing of messenger RNA.
 Further, case-by-case analysis of TCR-responsive phosphorylation sites on proteins belonging to relevant functional modules together with network analysis allowed us to deduce that serine-threonine (S-T) phosphorylation modulated protein-protein interactions (PPIs) in a system-wide fashion.
 We also provide experimental support for this inference by showing that phosphorylation of tubulin on six distinct serine residues abrogated PPIs during the assembly of microtubules.
 We propose that modulation of PPIs by stimulus-dependent changes in S-T phosphorylation state is a widespread phenomenon applicable to many other signaling systems.
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of T cell receptor signaling reveals system-wide modulation of protein-protein interactions.
Cytochromes P450 (CYPs) metabolize polyunsaturated long-chain fatty acids (PUFA-LC) to several classes of oxygenated metabolites.
 Through use of human recombinant CYPs, we recently showed that CYP1A1, -2C19, -2D6, -2E1, and -3A4 are mainly hydroxylases, whereas CYP1A2, -2C8, -2C9, and -2J2 are mainly epoxygenases of arachidonic acid (AA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), respectively.
 It is worth noting that the last double bond of these PUFAs, i.e., omega6 in AA or omega3 in EPA and DHA, respectively, was preferentially epoxidized.
 In this study, we have characterized the stereoselectivity of this epoxidation reaction by comparison with the PUFA-LC epoxide stereoisomers obtained from the enantioselective bacterial CYP102A1 F87V.
 The stereoselectivity of the epoxidation of the last olefin of AA (omega6), EPA (omega3), or DHA (omega3) differed between the CYP isoforms but was similar for EPA and DHA.
 These data give additional insight into the PUFA-LC epoxide enantiomers generated by the hepatic CYPs.
Stereoselective epoxidation of the last double bond of polyunsaturated fatty acids by human cytochromes P450.
CaMKII-dependent diastolic SR Ca2+ leak and elevated diastolic Ca2+ levels in right atrial myocardium of patients with atrial fibrillation.
&lt;h4&gt;Rationale&lt;/h4&gt;Although research suggests that diastolic Ca(2+) levels might be increased in atrial fibrillation (AF), this hypothesis has never been tested.
 Diastolic Ca(2+) leak from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) might increase diastolic Ca(2+) levels and play a role in triggering or maintaining AF by transient inward currents through Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchange.
 In ventricular myocardium, ryanodine receptor type 2 (RyR2) phosphorylation by Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK)II is emerging as an important mechanism for SR Ca(2+) leak.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;We tested the hypothesis that CaMKII-dependent diastolic SR Ca(2+) leak and elevated diastolic Ca(2+) levels occurs in atrial myocardium of patients with AF.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;We used isolated human right atrial myocytes from patients with AF versus sinus rhythm and found CaMKII expression to be increased by 40+/-14% (P&lt;0.05), as well as CaMKII phosphorylation by 33+/-12% (P&lt;0.05).
 This was accompanied by a significantly increased RyR2 phosphorylation at the CaMKII site (Ser2814) by 110+/-53%.
 Furthermore, cytosolic Ca(2+) levels were elevated during diastole (229+/-20 versus 164+/-8 nmol/L, P&lt;0.05).
 Most likely, this resulted from an increased SR Ca(2+) leak in AF (P&lt;0.05), which was not attributable to higher SR Ca(2+) load.
 Tetracaine experiments confirmed that SR Ca(2+) leak through RyR2 leads to the elevated diastolic Ca(2+) level.
 CaMKII inhibition normalized SR Ca(2+) leak and cytosolic Ca(2+) levels without changes in L-type Ca(2+) current.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;Increased CaMKII-dependent phosphorylation of RyR2 leads to increased SR Ca(2+) leak in human AF, causing elevated cytosolic Ca(2+) levels, thereby providing a potential arrhythmogenic substrate that could trigger or maintain AF.
Eukaryotic cells replicate by a complex series of evolutionarily conserved events that are tightly regulated at defined stages of the cell division cycle.
 Progression through this cycle involves a large number of dedicated protein complexes and signaling pathways, and deregulation of this process is implicated in tumorigenesis.
 We applied high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics to investigate the proteome and phosphoproteome of the human cell cycle on a global scale and quantified 6027 proteins and 20,443 unique phosphorylation sites and their dynamics.
 Co-regulated proteins and phosphorylation sites were grouped according to their cell cycle kinetics and compared to publicly available messenger RNA microarray data.
 Most detected phosphorylation sites and more than 20% of all quantified proteins showed substantial regulation, mainly in mitotic cells.
 Kinase-motif analysis revealed global activation during S phase of the DNA damage response network, which was mediated by phosphorylation by ATM or ATR or DNA-dependent protein kinases.
 We determined site-specific stoichiometry of more than 5000 sites and found that most of the up-regulated sites phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) or CDK2 were almost fully phosphorylated in mitotic cells.
 In particular, nuclear proteins and proteins involved in regulating metabolic processes have high phosphorylation site occupancy in mitosis.
 This suggests that these proteins may be inactivated by phosphorylation in mitotic cells.
Quantitative phosphoproteomics reveals widespread full phosphorylation site occupancy during mitosis.
Functional properties of RYR1 mutations identified in Swedish patients with malignant hyperthermia and central core disease.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;A diagnosis of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility by in vitro contraction testing can often only be performed at specialized laboratories far away from where patients live.
 Therefore, we have designed a protocol for genetic screening of the RYR1-cDNA and for functional testing of newly identified ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) gene variants in B lymphocytes isolated from peripheral blood samples drawn at local primary care centers.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;B lymphocytes were isolated for the extraction of RYR1-mRNA and genomic DNA and for establishment of lymphoblastoid B cell lines in 5 patients carrying yet unclassified mutations in the RYR1.
 The B lymphoblastoid cell lines were used to study resting cytoplasmic calcium concentration, the peak calcium transient induced by the sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca-ATPase inhibitor thapsigargin, and the dose-dependent calcium release induced by the ryanodine receptor agonist 4-chloro-m-cresol.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;It was possible to extract mRNA for cDNA synthesis and to create B lymphocyte clones from all samples.
 All B lymphoblastoid cell lines carrying RYR1 candidate mutations showed significantly increased resting cytoplasmic calcium levels as well as a shift to lower concentrations of 4-chloro-m-cresol inducing calcium release compared with controls.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Peripheral blood samples are stable regarding RNA and DNA extraction and establishment of lymphoblastoid B cell lines after transportation at ambient temperature over large distances by ordinary mail.
 Functional tests on B cells harboring the newly identified amino acid substitutions indicate that they alter intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis and are most likely causative of malignant hyperthermia.
AAA+ proteins RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 coordinate PIKK activity and function in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinase (PIKK) family proteins play essential roles in DNA-based and RNA-based processes, such as the response to DNA damage, messenger RNA (mRNA) quality control, transcription, and translation, where they contribute to the maintenance of genome integrity and accurate gene expression.
 The adenosine triphosphatases associated with diverse cellular activities (AAA+) family proteins RuvB-like 1 (RUVBL1) and RUVBL2 are involved in various cellular processes, including transcription, RNA modification, DNA repair, and telomere maintenance.
 We show that RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 associate with each PIKK family member.
 We also show that RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 control PIKK abundance at least at the mRNA level.
 Knockdown of RUVBL1 or RUVBL2 decreased PIKK abundance and impaired PIKK-mediated signaling.
 Analysis of SMG-1, a PIKK family member involved in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), revealed an essential role for RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 in NMD.
 RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 associated with SMG-1 and the messenger ribonucleoproteins in the cytoplasm and promoted the formation of mRNA surveillance complexes during NMD.
 Thus, RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 regulate PIKK functions on two different levels: They control the abundance of PIKKs, and they stimulate the formation of PIKK-containing molecular complexes, such as those involved in NMD.
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinase (PIKK) family and is a major regulator of translation, cell growth, and autophagy.
 mTOR exists in two distinct complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2, that differ in their subunit composition.
 In this study, we identified KIAA0406 as a novel mTOR-interacting protein.
 Because it has sequence homology with Schizosaccharomyces pombe Tti1, we named it mammalian Tti1.
 Tti1 constitutively interacts with mTOR in both mTORC1 and mTORC2.
 Knockdown of Tti1 suppresses phosphorylation of both mTORC1 substrates (S6K1 and 4E-BP1) and an mTORC2 substrate (Akt) and also induces autophagy.
 S.
 pombe Tti1 binds to Tel2, a protein whose mammalian homolog was recently reported to regulate the stability of PIKKs.
 We confirmed that Tti1 binds to Tel2 also in mammalian cells, and Tti1 interacts with and stabilizes all six members of the PIKK family of proteins (mTOR, ATM, ATR, DNA-PKcs, SMG-1, and TRRAP).
 Furthermore, using immunoprecipitation and size-exclusion chromatography analyses, we found that knockdown of either Tti1 or Tel2 causes disassembly of mTORC1 and mTORC2.
 These results indicate that Tti1 and Tel2 are important not only for mTOR stability but also for assembly of the mTOR complexes to maintain their activities.
Tti1 and Tel2 are critical factors in mammalian target of rapamycin complex assembly.
Recessive mutations in RYR1 are a common cause of congenital fiber type disproportion.
The main histological abnormality in congenital fiber type disproportion (CFTD) is hypotrophy of type 1 (slow twitch) fibers compared to type 2 (fast twitch) fibers.
 To investigate whether mutations in RYR1 are a cause of CFTD we sequenced RYR1 in seven CFTD families in whom the other known causes of CFTD had been excluded.
 We identified compound heterozygous changes in the RYR1 gene in four families (five patients), consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance.
 Three out of five patients had ophthalmoplegia, which may be the most specific clinical indication of mutations in RYR1.
 Type 1 fibers were at least 50% smaller, on average, than type 2 fibers in all biopsies.
 Recessive mutations in RYR1 are a relatively common cause of CFTD and can be associated with extreme fiber size disproportion.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle characterized by disturbance of intracellular calcium homeostasis in the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
 Mutations of the ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) gene account for most cases, with some studies claiming up to 86% of mutations in this locus.
 However, RYR1 gene is large and variants are common even in the normal population.
 We examined 54 families with MH susceptibility and 21 diagnosed with equivocal MH.
 Thirty-five were selected for an anesthetic reaction, whereas the remainder for hyperCKemia.
 In these, we studied all 106 exons of the RYR1 gene.
 When no mutation was found, we also screened: sodium channel voltage-gated, type IV alpha subunit (SCN4A), calcium channel voltage-dependent, L type, alpha 1S subunit (CACNA1S), and L-type voltage-gated calcium channel alpha 2/delta-subunit (CACNL2A).
 Twenty-nine different RYR1 mutations were discovered in 40 families.
 Three other MH genes were tested in negative cases.
 Fourteen RYR1 amino acid changes were novel, of which 12 were located outside the mutational 'hot spots'.
 In two families, the known mutation p.R3903Q was also observed in malignant hyperthermia-nonsusceptible (MHN) individuals.
 Unexpectedly, four changes were also found in the same family and two in another.
 Our study confirms that MH is genetically heterogeneous and that a consistent number of cases are not due to RYR1 mutations.
 The discordance between in vitro contracture test status and the presence of a proven causative RYR1 mutation suggests that the penetrance may vary due to as yet unknown factors.
Novel missense mutations and unexpected multiple changes of RYR1 gene in 75 malignant hyperthermia families.
Effects of a commonly occurring genetic polymorphism of human CYP3A4 (I118V) on the metabolism of anandamide.
The endocannabinoid system plays an important role in numerous physiological processes including mood, appetite, and pain sensation.
 A critical compound in maintaining cannabinoid tone is the endocannabinoid anandamide (AEA).
 We have recently shown that AEA is metabolized by several different human cytochromes P450 (P450) to form a number of metabolites, one of which exhibits increased biological activity.
 CYP3A4, one of the major P450s involved in the metabolism of AEA, produces four major metabolites.
 One of these metabolites, 5,6-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid ethanolamide (5,6-EET-EA), exhibits a much higher affinity than AEA for the cannabinoid 2 receptor (CB-2), which leads to a marked decrease in intracellular cAMP levels in cells expressing CB-2.
 There are multiple human alleles of CYP3A4, and the CYP3A4.4 allele has been shown to exhibit a significant decrease in activity.
 Recombinant CYP3A4*4 was expressed in Escherichia coli and was demonstrated to produce 60% less 6-hydroxytestosterone than the wild-type (WT) 3A4 in a reconstituted system.
 The metabolism of AEA by the WT and the CYP3A4.4 variant was investigated.
 The mutant produced 60% less of the four EET-EA metabolites than the WT.
 The mutant also produced a new peak on liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry not seen with the WT, which corresponded to 19-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid-ethanolamide.
 In addition, the mutant produces four novel peaks at m/z 380, which correspond to the addition of two oxygen atoms, possibly to form a peroxide bond.
 These data indicate that individuals expressing the CYP3A4.4 allele may exhibit significant variations in the metabolism of AEA as well as any other compounds resembling AEA.
Tel2 structure and function in the Hsp90-dependent maturation of mTOR and ATR complexes.
We reported previously that the stability of all mammalian phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinases (PIKKs) depends on their interaction with Tel2, the ortholog of yeast Tel2 and Caenorhabditis elegans Clk-2.
 Here we provide evidence that Tel2 acts with Hsp90 in the maturation of PIKK complexes.
 Quantitative immunoblotting showed that the abundance of Tel2 is low compared with the PIKKs, and Tel2 preferentially bound newly synthesized ATM, ATR, mTOR, and DNA-PKcs.
 Tel2 complexes contained, in addition to Tti1-Tti2, the Hsp90 chaperone, and inhibition of Hsp90 interfered with the interaction of Tel2 with the PIKKs.
 Analysis of in vivo labeled nascent protein complexes showed that Tel2 and Hsp90 mediate the formation of the mTOR TORC1 and TORC2 complexes and the association of ATR with ATRIP.
 The structure of yeast Tel2, reported here, shows that Tel2 consists of HEAT-like helical repeats that assemble into two separate α-solenoids.
 Through mutagenesis, we identify a surface patch of conserved residues involved in binding to the Tti1-Tti2 complex in vitro.
 In vivo, mutation of this conserved patch affects cell growth, levels of PIKKs, and ATM/ATR-mediated checkpoint signaling, highlighting the importance of Tti1-Tti2 binding to the function of Tel2.
 Taken together, our data suggest that the Tel2-Tti1-Tti2 complex is a PIKK-specific cochaperone for Hsp90.
A genetic screen identifies the Triple T complex required for DNA damage signaling and ATM and ATR stability.
In response to DNA damage, cells activate a complex signal transduction network called the DNA damage response (DDR).
 To enhance our current understanding of the DDR network, we performed a genome-wide RNAi screen to identify genes required for resistance to ionizing radiation (IR).
 Along with a number of known DDR genes, we discovered a large set of novel genes whose depletion leads to cellular sensitivity to IR.
 Here we describe TTI1 (Tel two-interacting protein 1) and TTI2 as highly conserved regulators of the DDR in mammals.
 TTI1 and TTI2 protect cells from spontaneous DNA damage, and are required for the establishment of the intra-S and G2/M checkpoints.
 TTI1 and TTI2 exist in multiple complexes, including a 2-MDa complex with TEL2 (telomere maintenance 2), called the Triple T complex, and phosphoinositide-3-kinase-related protein kinases (PIKKs) such as ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM).
 The components of the TTT complex are mutually dependent on each other, and act as critical regulators of PIKK abundance and checkpoint signaling.
Ryanodine receptors (RyRs) are located in the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum membrane and are responsible for the release of Ca(2+) from intracellular stores during excitation-contraction coupling in both cardiac and skeletal muscle.
 RyRs are the largest known ion channels (&gt; 2MDa) and exist as three mammalian isoforms (RyR 1-3), all of which are homotetrameric proteins that interact with and are regulated by phosphorylation, redox modifications, and a variety of small proteins and ions.
 Most RyR channel modulators interact with the large cytoplasmic domain whereas the carboxy-terminal portion of the protein forms the ion-conducting pore.
 Mutations in RyR2 are associated with human disorders such as catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia whereas mutations in RyR1 underlie diseases such as central core disease and malignant hyperthermia.
 This chapter examines the current concepts of the structure, function and regulation of RyRs and assesses the current state of understanding of their roles in associated disorders.
Ryanodine receptors: structure, expression, molecular details, and function in calcium release.
CYP2S1 is a recently described dioxin-inducible cytochrome P450.
 We previously demonstrated that human CYP2S1 oxidizes a number of carcinogens but only via the peroxide shunt.
 In this article, we investigated whether human CYP2S1 can metabolize cyclooxygenase- and lipoxygenase-derived lipid peroxides in a NADPH-independent fashion.
 Human CYP2S1 metabolizes prostaglandin G(2) (PGG(2)) (K(m) = 0.267 ± 0.072 μM) into several products including 12S-hydroxy-5Z,8E,10E-heptadecatrienoic acid (12-HHT).
 It also metabolizes prostaglandin H(2) (PGH(2)) (K(m) = 11.7 ± 2.8 μM) into malondialdehyde, 12-HHT, and thromboxane A(2) (TXA(2)).
 The turnover to 12-HHT by human CYP2S1 (1.59 ± 0.04 min(-1)) is 40-fold higher than that of TXA(2) (0.04 min(-1)).
 In addition to PGG(2) and PGH(2) metabolism, human CYP2S1 efficiently metabolizes the hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acids (5S-, 12S-, and 15S-) and 13S-hydroperoxyoctadecadienoic acid into 5-oxo-eicosatetraenoic acid (turnover = 16.7 ± 0.3 min(-1)), 12-oxo-eicosatetraenoic acid 1 (11.5 ± 0.9 min(-1)), 15-oxo-eicosatetraenoic acid (16.9 ± 0.8 min(-1)), and 13-octadecadienoic acid (20.2 ± 0.9 min(-1)), respectively.
 Other cytochromes P450 such as CYP1A1, 1A2, 1B1, and 3A4 underwent similar conversions but at slower rates.
 The fatty acid hydroperoxides were also converted by human CYP2S1 to several epoxyalcohols.
 Our data indicate that fatty acid endoperoxides and hydroperoxides represent endogenous substrates of CYP2S1 and suggest that the enzyme CYP2S1 may play an important role in the inflammatory process because some of the products that CYP2S1 produces play important roles in inflammation.
Human CYP2S1 metabolizes cyclooxygenase- and lipoxygenase-derived eicosanoids.
Protein phosphatase 5 is necessary for ATR-mediated DNA repair.
Several recent studies have shown that protein phosphatase 5 (PP5) participates in cell cycle arrest after DNA damage, but its roles in DNA repair have not yet been fully characterized.
 We investigated the roles of PP5 in the repair of ultraviolet (UV)- and neocarzinostatin (NCS)-induced DNA damage.
 The results of comet assays revealed different repair patterns in UV- and NCS-exposed U2OS-PS cells.
 PP5 is only essential for Rad3-related (ATR)-mediated DNA repair.
 Furthermore, the phosphorylation of 53BP1 and BRCA1, important mediators of DNA damage repair, and substrates of ATR and ATM decreased in U2OS-PS cells exposed to UV radiation.
 In contrast, the cell cycle arrest proteins p53, CHK1, and CHK2 were normally phosphorylated in U2OS and U2OS-PS cells exposed to UV radiation or treated with NCS.
 In view of these results, we suggest that PP5 plays a crucial role in ATR-mediated repair of UV-induced DNA damage.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a eukaryotic surveillance pathway that regulates the degradation of mRNAs harboring premature translation termination codons.
 NMD also influences the expression of many physiological transcripts.
 SMG-1 is a large kinase essential to NMD that phosphorylates Upf1, which seems to be the definitive signal triggering mRNA decay.
 However, the regulation of the kinase activity of SMG-1 remains poorly understood.
 Here, we reveal the three-dimensional architecture of SMG-1 in complex with SMG-8 and SMG-9, and the structural mechanisms regulating SMG-1 kinase.
 A bent arm comprising a long region of HEAT (huntington, elongation factor 3, a subunit of PP2A and TOR1) repeats at the N terminus of SMG-1 functions as a scaffold for SMG-8 and SMG-9, and projects from the C-terminal core containing the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase domain.
 SMG-9 seems to control the activity of SMG-1 indirectly through the recruitment of SMG-8 to the N-terminal HEAT repeat region of SMG-1.
 Notably, SMG-8 binding to the SMG-1:SMG-9 complex specifically down-regulates the kinase activity of SMG-1 on Upf1 without contacting the catalytic domain.
 Assembly of the SMG-1:SMG-8:SMG-9 complex induces a significant motion of the HEAT repeats that is signaled to the kinase domain.
 Thus, large-scale conformational changes induced by SMG-8 after SMG-9-mediated recruitment tune SMG-1 kinase activity to modulate NMD.
The nonsense-mediated mRNA decay SMG-1 kinase is regulated by large-scale conformational changes controlled by SMG-8.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;On the basis of large proteomics datasets measured from seven human cell lines we consider their intersection as an approximation of the human central proteome, which is the set of proteins ubiquitously expressed in all human cells.
 Composition and properties of the central proteome are investigated through bioinformatics analyses.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;We experimentally identify a central proteome comprising 1,124 proteins that are ubiquitously and abundantly expressed in human cells using state of the art mass spectrometry and protein identification bioinformatics.
 The main represented functions are proteostasis, primary metabolism and proliferation.
 We further characterize the central proteome considering gene structures, conservation, interaction networks, pathways, drug targets, and coordination of biological processes.
 Among other new findings, we show that the central proteome is encoded by exon-rich genes, indicating an increased regulatory flexibility through alternative splicing to adapt to multiple environments, and that the protein interaction network linking the central proteome is very efficient for synchronizing translation with other biological processes.
 Surprisingly, at least 10% of the central proteome has no or very limited functional annotation.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Our data and analysis provide a new and deeper description of the human central proteome compared to previous results thereby extending and complementing our knowledge of commonly expressed human proteins.
 All the data are made publicly available to help other researchers who, for instance, need to compare or link focused datasets to a common background.
Initial characterization of the human central proteome.
System-wide temporal characterization of the proteome and phosphoproteome of human embryonic stem cell differentiation.
To elucidate cellular events underlying the pluripotency of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), we performed parallel quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of hESCs during differentiation initiated by a diacylglycerol analog or transfer to media that had not been conditioned by feeder cells.
 We profiled 6521 proteins and 23,522 phosphorylation sites, of which almost 50% displayed dynamic changes in phosphorylation status during 24 hours of differentiation.
 These data are a resource for studies of the events associated with the maintenance of hESC pluripotency and those accompanying their differentiation.
 From these data, we identified a core hESC phosphoproteome of sites with similar robust changes in response to the two distinct treatments.
 These sites exhibited distinct dynamic phosphorylation patterns, which were linked to known or predicted kinases on the basis of the matching sequence motif.
 In addition to identifying previously unknown phosphorylation sites on factors associated with differentiation, such as kinases and transcription factors, we observed dynamic phosphorylation of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs).
 We found a specific interaction of DNMTs during early differentiation with the PAF1 (polymerase-associated factor 1) transcriptional elongation complex, which binds to promoters of the pluripotency and known DNMT target genes encoding OCT4 and NANOG, thereby providing a possible molecular link for the silencing of these genes during differentiation.
Modulation of ryanodine receptor Ca2+ channels.
Ryanodine-sensitive Ca2+ release channels (ryanodine receptors, RyRs) play a crucial role in the mobilization of Ca2+ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) during the excitation-contraction coupling of muscle cells.
 In skeletal muscle, depolarization of transverse tubules activates the RyR, whereas in cardiac muscle, a Ca2+ influx through an L-type Ca2+ channel activates the RyR.
 The RyR is also activated by caffeine, a low concentration (&lt;10 µM) of ryanodine or cyclic ADP-ribose.
 RyR activity is inhibited by Mg2+, ruthenium red, or higher concentrations (≥100 µM) of ryanodine.
 The activity of RyR channels is modulated by phosphorylation and by associated proteins, including calmodulin (CaM), calsequestrin (CSQ) and FK506-binding proteins (FKBPs).
 In muscle cells, apoCaM (Ca2+-free CaM) activates the RyR channel, and Ca2+ CaM (Ca2+-bound CaM) inhibits the channel.
 CSQ can bind approximately 40 moles of Ca2+/mole of CSQ in the SR lumen of muscle cells, and interacts functionally with RyR protein.
 When the RyR is stimulated, Ca2+ released from the lumen is dissociated from the CSQ-Ca2+ complex.
 A 12-kDa or 12.6-kDa FK506-binding protein (FKBP12 or FKBP12.6, respectively) is associated with RyR protein.
 When FKBP12 or FKBP12.6 is dissociated from the FKBP-RyR complex, the RyR is modulated (activated).
 Phosphorylation of the RyR by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II modulates the channel.
 PKA phosphorylation of the RyR on the skeletal and cardiac muscle SR dissociates FKBP12 or FKBP12.6 from the RyR complex.
 This review deals with the modulation mechanisms of RyR proteins by associated proteins and phosphorylation.
Mutations in PNKD causing paroxysmal dyskinesia alters protein cleavage and stability.
Paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) is a rare autosomal dominant movement disorder triggered by stress, fatigue or consumption of either alcohol or caffeine.
 Attacks last 1-4 h and consist of dramatic dystonia and choreoathetosis in the limbs, trunk and face.
 The disease is associated with single amino acid changes (A7V or A9V) in PNKD, a protein of unknown function.
 Here we studied the stability, cellular localization and enzymatic activity of the PNKD protein in cultured cells and transgenic animals.
 The N-terminus of the wild-type (WT) long PNKD isoform (PNKD-L) undergoes a cleavage event in vitro, resistance to which is conferred by disease-associated mutations.
 Mutant PNKD-L protein is degraded faster than the WT protein.
 These results suggest that the disease mutations underlying PNKD may disrupt protein processing in vivo, a hypothesis supported by our observation of decreased cortical Pnkd-L levels in mutant transgenic mice.
 Pnkd is homologous to a superfamily of enzymes with conserved β-lactamase domains.
 It shares highest homology with glyoxalase II but does not catalyze the same reaction.
 Lower glutathione levels were found in cortex lysates from Pnkd knockout mice versus WT littermates.
 Taken together, our results suggest an important role for the Pnkd protein in maintaining cellular redox status.
An endogenous probe for CYP3A activity would be useful for early identification of in vivo cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 inhibitors.
 The aim of this study was to determine whether formation clearance (CL(f)) of the sum of 6β-hydroxycortisol and 6β-hydroxycortisone is a useful probe of CYP3A4 inhibition in vivo.
 In human liver microsomes (HLMs), the formation of 6β-hydroxycortisol and 6β-hydroxycortisone was catalyzed by CYP3A4, and itraconazole inhibited these reactions with half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC(50))(,u) values of 3.1 nmol/l and 3.4 nmol/l, respectively.
 The in vivo IC(50,u) value of itraconazole for the combined CL(f) of 6β-hydroxycortisone and 6β-hydroxycortisol was 1.6 nmol/l.
 The greater inhibitory potency in vivo is probably due to circulating inhibitory itraconazole metabolites.
 The maximum in vivo inhibition was 59%, suggesting that f(m,CYP3A4) for cortisol and cortisone 6β-hydroxylation is ~60%.
 Given the significant decrease in CL(f) of 6β-hydroxycortisone and 6β-hydroxycortisol after 200-mg and 400-mg single doses of itraconazole, this endogenous probe can be used to detect moderate and potent CYP3A4 inhibition in vivo.
Evaluation of 6beta-hydroxycortisol, 6beta-hydroxycortisone, and a combination of the two as endogenous probes for inhibition of CYP3A4 in vivo.
King-Denborough syndrome (KDS), first described in 1973, is a rare condition characterised by the triad of dysmorphic features, myopathy, and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS).
 Autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expressivity has been reported in several cases.
 Mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene have been implicated in a wide range of myopathies such as central core disease (CCD), the malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility trait and one isolated patient with KDS.
 Here we report clinical, pathologic and genetic features of four unrelated patients with KDS.
 Patients had a relatively uniform clinical presentation but muscle biopsy findings were highly variable.
 Heterozygous missense mutations in RYR1 were uncovered in three out of four families, of which one mutation was novel and two have previously been reported in MH.
 Further RyR1 protein expression studies performed in two families showed marked reduction of the RyR1 protein, indicating the presence of allelic RYR1 mutations not detectable on routine sequencing and potentially explaining marked intrafamilial variability.
 Our findings support the hypothesis that RYR1 mutations are associated with King-Denborough syndrome but that further genetic heterogeneity is likely.
King-Denborough syndrome with and without mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene.
Cholesterol 25-hydroxylation activity of CYP3A.
To date, many studies have been conducted using 25-hydroxycholesterol, which is a potent regulator of lipid metabolism.
 However, the origins of this oxysterol have not been entirely elucidated.
 Cholesterol 25-hydroxylase is one of the enzymes responsible for the metabolism of 25-hydroxycholesterol, but the expression of this enzyme is very low in humans.
 This oxysterol is also synthesized by sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A1) and cholesterol 24-hydroxylase(CYP46A1), but it is only a minor product of these enzymes.
 We now report that CYP3A synthesizes a significant amount of 25-hydroxycholesterol and may participate in the regulation of lipid metabolism.
 Induction of CYP3A by pregnenolone-16α-carbonitrile caused the accumulation of 25-hydroxycholesterol in a cell line derived from mouse liver.
 Furthermore, treatment of the cells with troleandomycin, a specific inhibitor of CYP3A, significantly reduced cellular 25-hydroxycholesterol concentrations.
 In cells that overexpressed human recombinant CYP3A4, the activity of cholesterol 25-hydroxylation was found to be higher than that of cholesterol 4β-hydroxylation, a known marker activity of CYP3A4.
 In addition, 25-hydroxycholesterol concentrations in normal human sera correlated positively with the levels of 4β-hydroxycholesterol (r = 0.650, P &lt; 0.0001, n = 78), but did not significantly correlate with the levels of 27-hydroxycholesterol or 24S-hydroxycholesterol.
 These results demonstrate the significance of CYP3A on the production of 25-hydroxycholesterol.
Dominant and recessive RYR1 mutations in adults with core lesions and mild muscle symptoms.
&lt;h4&gt;Introduction&lt;/h4&gt;Ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) mutations have been associated with central core disease (CCD), multiminicore/minicore/multicore disease (MmD), and susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia (MH).
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Patients with muscle symptoms in adulthood, who had features compatible with CCD/MmD, underwent clinical, histological, and genetic (RYR1 and SEPN1 genes) evaluations.
 Published cases of CCD and MmD with adult onset were also reviewed.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Eight patients fulfilled the criteria for further analysis.
 Five RYR1 mutations, 4 of them unreported, were detected in 3 patients.
 Compound heterozygosity was proven in 1 case.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;To our knowledge, this is the only report of adult onset associated with recessive RYR1 mutations and central core/multiminicores on muscle biopsy.
 Although adult patients with CCD, MmD, and minimally symptomatic MH with abnormal muscle biopsy findings usually have a mild clinical course, differential diagnosis and carrier screening is crucial for prevention of potentially life-threatening reactions to general anesthesia.
The DNA damage response kinases ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM), DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), and ataxia telangiectasia-mutated and Rad3-related (ATR) signal through multiple pathways to promote genome maintenance.
 These related kinases share similar methods of regulation, including recruitment to specific nucleic acid structures and association with protein activators.
 ATM and DNA-PK also are regulated via phosphorylation, which provides a convenient biomarker for their activity.
 Whether phosphorylation regulates ATR is unknown.
 Here we identify ATR Thr-1989 as a DNA damage-regulated phosphorylation site.
 Selective inhibition of ATR prevents Thr-1989 phosphorylation, and phosphorylation requires ATR activation.
 Cells engineered to express only a non-phosphorylatable T1989A mutant exhibit a modest ATR functional defect.
 Our results suggest that, like ATM and DNA-PK, phosphorylation regulates ATR, and phospho-peptide specific antibodies to Thr-1989 provide a proximal marker of ATR activation.
Thr-1989 phosphorylation is a marker of active ataxia telangiectasia-mutated and Rad3-related (ATR) kinase.
ATR autophosphorylation as a molecular switch for checkpoint activation.
The ataxia telangiectasia-mutated and Rad3-related (ATR) kinase is a master checkpoint regulator safeguarding the genome.
 Upon DNA damage, the ATR-ATRIP complex is recruited to sites of DNA damage by RPA-coated single-stranded DNA and activated by an elusive process.
 Here, we show that ATR is transformed into a hyperphosphorylated state after DNA damage, and that a single autophosphorylation event at Thr 1989 is crucial for ATR activation.
 Phosphorylation of Thr 1989 relies on RPA, ATRIP, and ATR kinase activity, but unexpectedly not on the ATR stimulator TopBP1.
 Recruitment of ATR-ATRIP to RPA-ssDNA leads to congregation of ATR-ATRIP complexes and promotes Thr 1989 phosphorylation in trans.
 Phosphorylated Thr 1989 is directly recognized by TopBP1 via the BRCT domains 7 and 8, enabling TopBP1 to engage ATR-ATRIP, to stimulate the ATR kinase, and to facilitate ATR substrate recognition.
 Thus, ATR autophosphorylation on RPA-ssDNA is a molecular switch to launch robust checkpoint response.
Characterization of the binding sites for the interactions between FKBP12 and intracellular calcium release channels.
FKBP12, an FK506 binding protein, interacts with type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1) and modulates its calcium channel activity.
 However, there are many opposing reports of FKBP12's interaction with other related calcium channels, such as type 1 IP(3) receptor and type 3 ryanodine receptor (IP(3)R1 and RyR3).
 In addition, the involvement of the prolyl-dipeptide motif in the calcium channels and the corresponding binding residues in FKBP12 remain controversial.
 Through pulldown assays with recombinant proteins, we provide biochemical evidence of the interaction between FKBP12 and RyR1, RyR3 and IP(3)R1.
 Using NMR chemical shift mapping, we show that the important binding residues in FKBP12 are located in its hydrophobic FK506 binding region.
 Consistently, we demonstrate that FK506 can competitively inhibit the interaction between FKBP12 and the dipeptide motifs of the calcium channels.
 We believe our results shed lights on the binding mechanism of calcium channel-FKBP12 interaction.
ATR (ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3 related) is an essential regulator of genome integrity.
 It controls and coordinates DNA-replication origin firing, replication-fork stability, cell-cycle checkpoints, and DNA repair.
 Previously, autosomal-recessive loss-of-function mutations in ATR have been demonstrated in Seckel syndrome, a developmental disorder.
 Here, however, we report on a different kind of genetic disorder that is due to functionally compromised ATR activity, which translates into an autosomal-dominant inherited disease.
 The condition affects 24 individuals in a five-generation pedigree and comprises oropharyngeal cancer, skin telangiectases, and mild developmental anomalies of the hair, teeth, and nails.
 We mapped the disorder to a ∼16.8 cM interval in chromosomal region 3q22-24, and by sequencing candidate genes, we found that ATR contained a heterozygous missense mutation (c.6431A&gt;G [p.Gln2144Arg]) that segregated with the disease.
 The mutation occurs within the FAT (FRAP, ATM, and TRRAP) domain-which can activate p53-of ATR.
 The mutation did not lead to a reduction in ATR expression, but cultured fibroblasts showed lower p53 levels after activation of ATR with hydroxyurea than did normal control fibroblasts.
 Moreover, loss of heterozygosity for the ATR locus was noted in oropharyngeal-tumor tissue.
 Collectively, the clinicopathological and molecular findings point to a cancer syndrome and provide evidence implicating a germline mutation in ATR and susceptibility to malignancy in humans.
Germline mutation in ATR in autosomal- dominant oropharyngeal cancer syndrome.
Disease mutations in the ryanodine receptor central region: crystal structures of a phosphorylation hot spot domain.
Ryanodine Receptors (RyRs) are huge Ca²⁺ release channels in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and form targets for phosphorylation and disease mutations.
 We present crystal structures of a domain in three RyR isoforms, containing the Ser2843 (RyR1) and Ser2808/Ser2814 (RyR2) phosphorylation sites.
 The RyR1 domain is the target for 11 disease mutations.
 Several of these are clustered near the phosphorylation sites, suggesting that phosphorylation and disease mutations may affect the same interface.
 The L2867G mutation causes a drastic thermal destabilization and aggregation at room temperature.
 Crystal structures for other disease mutants show that they affect surface properties and intradomain salt bridges.
 In vitro phosphorylation experiments show that up to five residues in one long loop of RyR2 can be phosphorylated by PKA or CaMKII.
 Docking into cryo-electron microscopy maps suggests a putative location in the clamp region, implying that mutations and phosphorylation may affect the allosteric motions within this area.
Congenital myopathies describe a group of inherited muscle disorders with neonatal or infantile onset typically associated with muscle weakness, respiratory involvement and delayed motor milestones.
 We previously reported a novel congenital myopathy in an inbred Samaritan family.
 All patients displayed severe neonatal hypotonia and respiratory distress, and unlike other congenital myopathies, a constantly improving health status.
 As clinical and pathological data did not point to preferential candidate genes, we performed exome sequencing complemented by linkage analysis to identify the mutation causing the benign Samaritan congenital myopathy.
 We identified the homozygous p.Tyr1088Cys mutation in RYR1, encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor.
 This sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium channel is a key regulator of excitation-contraction coupling (ECC).
 Western blot and immunohistofluorescence revealed a significant decrease of the RYR1 protein level and an abnormal organization of skeletal muscle triad markers as caveolin-3, dysferlin and amphiphysin 2.
 RYR1 mutations are associated with different myopathies and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
 The index patient had mild hyperthermia following anesthesia, indicating that the inbred Samaritan population might be a risk group for this disorder.
 Our results suggest an aberrant ECC as the primary cause of this disease, and broaden the clinical consequences of RYR1 defects.
Samaritan myopathy, an ultimately benign congenital myopathy, is caused by a RYR1 mutation.
Dihydrotestosterone is a more potent androgen than testosterone and plays an important role in endocrine function.
 We demonstrated that, like testosterone, dihydrotestosterone can be oxidized by human cytochrome P450 (P450) 19A1, the steroid aromatase.
 The products identified include the 19-hydroxy- and 19-oxo derivatives and the resulting Δ(1,10)-, Δ(5,10)-, and Δ(9,10)-dehydro 19-norsteroid products (loss of 19-methyl group).
 The overall catalytic efficiency of oxidation was ~10-fold higher than reported for 3α-reduction by 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, the major enzyme known to deactivate dihydrotestosterone.
 These and other studies demonstrate the flexibility of P450 19A1 in removing the 1- and 2-hydrogens from 19-norsteroids, the 2-hydrogen from estrone, and (in this case) the 1-, 5β-, and 9β-hydrogens of dihydrotestosterone.
 Incubation of dihydrotestosterone with human liver microsomes and NADPH yielded the 18- and 19-hydroxy products plus the Δ(1,10)-dehydro 19-nor product identified in the P450 19A1 reaction.
 The 18- and 19-hydroxylation reactions were attributed to P450 3A4, and 18- and 19-hydroxydihydrotestosterone were identified in human plasma and urine samples.
 The change in the pucker of the A ring caused by reduction of the Δ(4,5) bond is remarkable in shifting the course of hydroxylation from the 6β-, 2β-, 1β-, and 15β-methylene carbons (testosterone) to the axial methyl groups (18, 19) in dihydrotestosterone and demonstrates the sensitivity of P450 3A4, even with its large active site, to small changes in substrate structure.
Oxidation of dihydrotestosterone by human cytochromes P450 19A1 and 3A4.
Molecular cloning of cDNA encoding human and rabbit forms of the Ca2+ release channel (ryanodine receptor) of skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum.
We have cloned cDNAs encoding the rabbit and human forms of the Ca2+ release channel of sarcoplasmic reticulum.
 The human cDNA encodes a protein of 5032 amino acids, with a molecular weight of 563,584, which is made without an NH2-terminal signal sequence.
 Amino acid substitutions between rabbit and human sequences were noted in 163 positions and deletions or insertions in eight regions accounted for additional sequence differences between the two proteins.
 Analysis of the sequence indicates that 10 potential transmembrane sequences in the COOH-terminal fifth of the molecule and two additional, potential transmembrane sequences nearer to the center of the molecule could contribute to the formation of the Ca2+ conducting pore.
 The remainder of the molecule is hydrophilic and presumably constitutes the cytoplasmic domain of the protein.
 A 114-120 amino acid motif is repeated four times in the protein, in residues 841-954, 955-1068, 2725-2844, and 2845-2958 and a 16 amino acid part of the motif is repeated twice more in residues 1344-1359 and 1371-1386.
 Although the channel is modulated by Ca2+, ATP, and calmodulin, no clear high affinity Ca2(+)-binding domain of the EF hand type and no clear high affinity ATP-binding domain were detected in the primary sequence.
 An acidic sequence in residues 1872-1923 contains 79% glutamate or aspartate residues and this sequence is a potential low affinity Ca2(+)-binding site.
 Several potential calmodulin-binding sites were observed in the sequence, in the region 2800 to 3050.
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics has achieved extraordinary success in qualitative and quantitative analysis of cellular protein phosphorylation.
 Considering that an estimated level of phosphorylation in a cell is placed at well above 100,000 sites, there is still much room for improvement.
 Here, we attempt to extend the depth of phosphoproteome coverage while maintaining realistic aspirations in terms of available material, robustness, and instrument running time.
 We developed three strategies, where each provided a different balance between these three key parameters.
 The first strategy simply used enrichment by Ti(4+)-IMAC followed by reversed chromatography LC-MS (termed 1D).
 The second strategy incorporated an additional fractionation step through the use of HILIC (2D).
 Finally, a third strategy was designed employing first an SCX fractionation, followed by Ti(4+)-IMAC enrichment and additional fractionation by HILIC (3D).
 A preliminary evaluation was performed on the HeLa cell line.
 Detecting 3700 phosphopeptides in about 2 h, the 1D strategy was found to be the most sensitive but limited in comprehensivity, mainly due to issues with complexity and dynamic range.
 Overall, the best balance was achieved using the 2D based strategy, identifying close to 17,000 phosphopeptides with less than 1 mg of material in about 48 h.
 Subsequently, we confirmed the findings with the K562 cell sample.
 When sufficient material was available, the 3D strategy increased phosphoproteome allowing over 22,000 unique phosphopeptides to be identified.
 Unfortunately, the 3D strategy required more time and over 1 mg of material before it started to outperform 2D.
 Ultimately, combining all strategies, we were able to identify over 16,000 and nearly 24,000 unique phosphorylation sites from the cancer cell lines HeLa and K562, respectively.
 In summary, we demonstrate the need to carry out extensive fractionation for deep mining of the phosphoproteome and provide a guide for appropriate strategies depending on sample amount and/or analysis time.
Toward a comprehensive characterization of a human cancer cell phosphoproteome.
Activation of DSB processing requires phosphorylation of CtIP by ATR.
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) activate a DNA damage response (DDR) that coordinates checkpoint pathways with DNA repair.
 ATM and ATR kinases are activated sequentially.
 Homology-directed repair (HDR) is initiated by resection of DSBs to generate 3' single-stranded DNA overhangs.
 How resection and HDR are activated during DDR is not known, nor are the roles of ATM and ATR in HDR.
 Here, we show that CtIP undergoes ATR-dependent hyperphosphorylation in response to DSBs.
 ATR phosphorylates an invariant threonine, T818 of Xenopus CtIP (T859 in human).
 Nonphosphorylatable CtIP (T818A) does not bind to chromatin or initiate resection.
 Our data support a model in which ATM activity is required for an early step in resection, leading to ATR activation, CtIP-T818 phosphorylation, and accumulation of CtIP on chromatin.
 Chromatin binding by modified CtIP precedes extensive resection and full checkpoint activation.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Mutations in the ryanodine receptor type 1 gene (RYR1) that encodes the skeletal muscle-specific intracellular calcium (Ca(2+)) release channel are a cause of malignant hyperthermia (MH).
 In this study, we examined RYR1 mutations in a large number of North American MH-susceptible (MHS) subjects without prior genetic diagnosis.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;RYR1 was examined in 120 unrelated MHS subjects from the United States in a tiered manner.
 The α-1 subunit of the dihydropyridine receptor gene (CACNA1S) was screened for 4 variants in subjects in whom no abnormality was found in ≥ 100 exons of RYR1.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Ten known causative MH mutations were found in 26 subjects.
 Variants of uncertain significance in RYR1 were found in 36 subjects, 16 of which are novel.
 Novel variants in both RYR1 and CACNA1S were found in the 1 subject who died of MH.
 Two RYR1 variants were found in 4 subjects.
 Variants of uncertain significance were found outside and inside the hotspots of RYR1.
 Maximal contractures in the caffeine-halothane contracture test were greater in those who had a known MH mutation or variant of uncertain significance in RYR1 than in those who did not.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The identification of novel RYR1 variants and previously observed RYR1 variants of uncertain significance in independent MHS families is necessary for demonstrating the significance of these variants for MH susceptibility and supports the need for functional studies of these variants.
 Continued reporting of the clinical phenotypes of MH is necessary for interpretation of genetic findings, especially because the pathogenicity of most of these genetic variants associated with MHS remains to be elucidated.
Ryanodine receptor type 1 gene variants in the malignant hyperthermia-susceptible population of the United States.
Exome sequencing reveals novel rare variants in the ryanodine receptor and calcium channel genes in malignant hyperthermia families.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;About half of malignant hyperthermia (MH) cases are associated with skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) and calcium channel, voltage-dependent, L type, α1S subunit (CACNA1S) gene mutations, leaving many with an unknown cause.
 The authors chose to apply a sequencing approach to uncover causal variants in unknown cases.
 Sequencing the exome, the protein-coding region of the genome, has power at low sample sizes and identified the cause of over a dozen Mendelian disorders.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The authors considered four families with multiple MH cases lacking mutations in RYR1 and CACNA1S by Sanger sequencing of complementary DNA.
 Exome sequencing in two affecteds per family, chosen for maximum genetic distance, were compared.
 Variants were ranked by allele frequency, protein change, and measures of conservation among mammals to assess likelihood of causation.
 Finally, putative pathogenic mutations were genotyped in other family members to verify cosegregation with MH.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Exome sequencing revealed one rare RYR1 nonsynonymous variant in each of three families (Asp1056His, Val2627Met, Val4234Leu), and one CACNA1S variant (Thr1009Lys) in the fourth family.
 These were not seen in variant databases or in our control population sample of 5,379 exomes.
 Follow-up sequencing in other family members verified cosegregation of alleles with MH.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The authors found that using both exome sequencing and allele frequency data from large sequencing efforts may aid genetic diagnosis of MH.
 In a sample selected by the authors, this technique was more sensitive for variant detection in known genes than Sanger sequencing of complementary DNA, and allows for the possibility of novel gene discovery.
An enzyme assisted RP-RPLC approach for in-depth analysis of human liver phosphoproteome.
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most common post-translational modifications.
 It plays key roles in regulating diverse biological processes of liver tissues.
 To better understand the role of protein phosphorylation in liver functions, it is essential to perform in-depth phosphoproteome analysis of human liver.
 Here, an enzyme assisted reversed-phase-reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RP-RPLC) approach with both RPLC separations operated with optimized acidic mobile phase was developed.
 High orthogonal separation was achieved by trypsin digestion of the Glu-C generated peptides in the fractions collected from the first RPLC separation.
 The phosphoproteome coverage was further improved by using two types of instruments, i.e.
 TripleTOF 5600 and LTQ Orbitrap Velos.
 A total of 22,446 phosphorylation sites, corresponding to 6526 nonredundant phosphoproteins were finally identified from normal human liver tissues.
 Of these sites, 15,229 sites were confidently localized with Ascore≥13.
 This dataset was the largest phosphoproteome dataset of human liver.
 It can be a public resource for the liver research community and holds promise for further biology studies.
&lt;h4&gt;Biological significance&lt;/h4&gt;The enzyme assisted approach enabled the two RPLC separations operated both with optimized acidic mobile phases.
 The identifications from TripleTOF 5600 and Orbitrap Velos are highly complementary.
 The largest phosphoproteome dataset of human liver was generated.
Central core disease (CCD) is a genetically heterogeneous congenital myopathy, and ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1, gene ID6261) is the only pathogenicity gene until now.
 Data on mutation characteristics of RYR1 in the Chinese CCD population are scarce.
 This study searched for mutations in the C-terminal-encoding domain of RYR1 in six Chinese patients with CCD, and identified five missense mutations (N4807F, R4861H, R4893P, G4897D, and I4898T).
 Among them, N4807F, G4897D were novel while R4861H, R4893P, and I4898T were previously reported.
 All missense mutations were highly conserved across the species of human, mouse, rabbit, fish, and pig.
 This study found that mutations could be identified in about 85% CCD patients, even if only the C-terminal-encoding region of RYR1 was screened.
 Many mutations clustered in exons 100-102.
Novel RYR1 missense mutations in six Chinese patients with central core disease.
Characterization of mRNA species related to human liver cytochrome P-450 nifedipine oxidase and the regulation of catalytic activity.
P-450NF is the major enzyme in human liver involved in the metabolism of the calcium-channel blocker nifedipine.
 By screening a bacteriophage lambda gt11 expression library, a cDNA clone designated NF 10 with an insert length of 2.8 kilobases (kb) was isolated.
 This clone was sequenced and found to be highly similar in its overlapping section with sequences of two other cDNA clones previously isolated from the same expression library, NF 25 (Beaune, P.
 H., Umbenhauer, D.
 R., Bork, R.
 W., Lloyd, R.
 S., and Guengerich, F.
 P.
 (1986) Proc.
 Natl.
 Acad.
 Sci.
 U.
 S.
 A.
 83, 8064-8068) and HLp (Molowa, D.
 T., Schuetz, E.
 G., Wrighton, S.
 A., Watkins, P.
 B., Kremers, P., Mendez-Picon, G., Parker, G.
 A., and Guzelian, P.
 S.
 (1986) Proc.
 Natl.
 Acad.
 Sci.
 U.
 S.
 A.
 83, 5311-5315).
 However, clone NF 10 had an extra 814 or 813 bases of 3'-noncoding sequence relative to NF 25 or HLp, respectively, and this additional sequence contained a second consensus polyadenylation signal.
 Specific oligonucleotides were synthesized to differentiate between these three clones at the mRNA level.
 Oligonucleotides specific to the protein coding region of each clone were found to hybridize to mRNAs of 2.2 and 3.0 kb in size at a ratio of approximately 10:1.
 The major species of hybridizable mRNA was specific to clone NF 25, and levels of this mRNA could be correlated with levels of immunochemically detectable P-450NF and nifedipine oxidase activity in individual human liver samples.
 In addition, an oligonucleotide specific to the 3'-noncoding region of clone NF 10 hybridized only with the 3.0-kb mRNA.
 We conclude that alternative use of the second polyadenylation signal present in clone NF 10 results in production of the 3.0-kb mRNA species and that a pretranslational control mechanism is primarily involved in the regulation of nifedipine oxidase activity.
A novel RyR2 mutation in a 2-year-old baby presenting with atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and atrial ectopic tachycardia.
ATR controls chromosome integrity and chromatin dynamics.
 We have previously shown that yeast Mec1/ATR promotes chromatin detachment from the nuclear envelope to counteract aberrant topological transitions during DNA replication.
 Here, we provide evidence that ATR activity at the nuclear envelope responds to mechanical stress.
 Human ATR associates with the nuclear envelope during S phase and prophase, and both osmotic stress and mechanical stretching relocalize ATR to nuclear membranes throughout the cell cycle.
 The ATR-mediated mechanical response occurs within the range of physiological forces, is reversible, and is independent of DNA damage signaling.
 ATR-defective cells exhibit aberrant chromatin condensation and nuclear envelope breakdown.
 We propose that mechanical forces derived from chromosome dynamics and torsional stress on nuclear membranes activate ATR to modulate nuclear envelope plasticity and chromatin association to the nuclear envelope, thus enabling cells to cope with the mechanical strain imposed by these molecular processes.
ATR mediates a checkpoint at the nuclear envelope in response to mechanical stress.
Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) is a surveillance mechanism that degrades aberrant mRNAs.
 A complex comprising SMG1, UPF1, and the translation termination factors eRF1 and eRF3 (SURF) is assembled in the vicinity of a premature termination codon.
 Subsequently, an interaction with UPF2, UPF3b, and the exon junction complex induces the formation of the decay-inducing complex (DECID) and triggers NMD.
 We previously identified the RNA helicase DHX34 as an NMD factor in C.
 elegans and in vertebrates.
 Here, we investigate the mechanism by which DHX34 activates NMD in human cells.
 We show that DHX34 is recruited to the SURF complex via its preferential interaction with hypophosphorylated UPF1.
 A series of molecular transitions induced by DHX34 include enhanced recruitment of UPF2, increased UPF1 phosphorylation, and dissociation of eRF3 from UPF1.
 Thus, DHX34 promotes mRNP remodeling and triggers the conversion from the SURF complex to the DECID complex resulting in NMD activation.
The RNA helicase DHX34 activates NMD by promoting a transition from the surveillance to the decay-inducing complex.
De novo mutations in moderate or severe intellectual disability.
Genetics is believed to have an important role in intellectual disability (ID).
 Recent studies have emphasized the involvement of de novo mutations (DNMs) in ID but the extent to which they contribute to its pathogenesis and the identity of the corresponding genes remain largely unknown.
 Here, we report a screen for DNMs in subjects with moderate or severe ID.
 We sequenced the exomes of 41 probands and their parents, and confirmed 81 DNMs affecting the coding sequence or consensus splice sites (1.98 DNMs/proband).
 We observed a significant excess of de novo single nucleotide substitutions and loss-of-function mutations in these cases compared to control subjects, suggesting that at least a subset of these variations are pathogenic.
 A total of 12 likely pathogenic DNMs were identified in genes previously associated with ID (ARID1B, CHD2, FOXG1, GABRB3, GATAD2B, GRIN2B, MBD5, MED13L, SETBP1, TBR1, TCF4, WDR45), resulting in a diagnostic yield of ∼29%.
 We also identified 12 possibly pathogenic DNMs in genes (HNRNPU, WAC, RYR2, SET, EGR1, MYH10, EIF2C1, COL4A3BP, CHMP2A, PPP1CB, VPS4A, PPP2R2B) that have not previously been causally linked to ID.
 Interestingly, no case was explained by inherited mutations.
 Protein network analysis indicated that the products of many of these known and candidate genes interact with each other or with products of other ID-associated genes further supporting their involvement in ID.
 We conclude that DNMs represent a major cause of moderate or severe ID.
Human ryanodine receptor 2 (hRyR2) mediates calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, enabling cardiomyocyte contraction.
 The N-terminal region of hRyR2 (amino acids 1-606) is the target of &gt;30 arrhythmogenic mutations and contains a binding site for phosphoprotein phosphatase 1.
 Here, the solution and crystal structures determined under near-physiological conditions, as well as a homology model of the hRyR2 N-terminal region, are presented.
 The N-terminus is held together by a unique network of interactions among its three domains, A, B and C, in which the central helix (amino acids 410-437) plays a prominent stabilizing role.
 Importantly, the anion-binding site reported for the mouse RyR2 N-terminal region is notably absent from the human RyR2.
 The structure concurs with the differential stability of arrhythmogenic mutations in the central helix (R420W, I419F and I419F/R420W) which are owing to disparities in the propensity of mutated residues to form energetically favourable or unfavourable contacts.
 In solution, the N-terminus adopts a globular shape with a prominent tail that is likely to involve residues 545-606, which are unresolved in the crystal structure.
 Docking the N-terminal domains into cryo-electron microscopy maps of the closed and open RyR1 conformations reveals C(α) atom movements of up to 8 Å upon channel gating, and predicts the location of the leucine-isoleucine zipper segment and the interaction site for spinophilin and phosphoprotein phosphatase 1 on the RyR surface.
Structural insights into the human RyR2 N-terminal region involved in cardiac arrhythmias.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Ryanodine receptor (RyR2) mutations have largely been associated with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (PMVT).
 The role of RyR2 mutations in the pathogenesis of arrhythmias and syncope at rest is unknown.
 We sought to characterize the clinical and functional characteristics associated with a novel RyR2 mutation found in a mother and daughter with PMVT at rest.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;A 31-year-old female with syncope at rest and recurrent short-coupled premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) initiating PMVT was found to be heterozygous for a novel RyR2-H29D mutation.
 Her mother, who also had syncope at rest and short-coupled PMVT, was found to harbor the same mutation.
 Human RyR2-H29D mutant channels were generated using site-directed mutagenesis and heterologously expressed in HEK293 cells together with the stabilizing protein calstabin2 (FKPB12.6).
 Single channel measurements of RyR2-H29D mutant channels and wild type (WT) RyR2 channels were compared at varying concentrations of cytosolic Ca(2+).
 Binding affinities of the RyR2-H29D channels and RyR2-WT channels to calstabin2 were compared.
 Functional characterization of the RyR2-H29D mutant channel revealed significantly higher open probability and opening frequency at diastolic levels of cytosolic Ca(2+) under non-stress conditions without protein kinase A treatment.
 This was associated with a modest depletion of calstabin2 binding under resting conditions.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The RyR2-H29D mutation is associated with a clinical phenotype of short-coupled PMVT at rest.
 In contrast to catecholaminergic PMVT-associated RyR2 mutations, RyR2-H29D causes a leaky channel at diastolic levels of Ca(2+) under non-stress conditions.
 Leaky RyR2 may be an under-recognized mechanism for idiopathic PMVT at rest.
Short-coupled polymorphic ventricular tachycardia at rest linked to a novel ryanodine receptor (RyR2) mutation: leaky RyR2 channels under non-stress conditions.
The cytochrome P-450s are a large multigene family of enzymes involved in the metabolism and detoxification of drugs and chemicals.
 Using a full length cDNA clone for the human nifedipine oxidase gene (CYP3) and a panel of human-rodent somatic cell hybrids, we have assigned this gene family to chromosome 7q22-qter.
 A search for RFLPs using this probe yielded no results.
The human cytochrome P450 CYP3 locus: assignment to chromosome 7q22-qter.
Human CYP1A2: sequence, gene structure, comparison with the mouse and rat orthologous gene, and differences in liver 1A2 mRNA expression.
We have sequenced the human CYP1A2 (cytochrome P(3)450) gene, 1,906 basepairs (bp) of the 5' flanking region, and 113 bp of the 3' flanking region.
 The gene spans almost 7.8 kilobases, comprising seven exons and six introns.
 The transcriptional start site was determined by both primer extension and S1 mapping.
 Including the first noncoding exon of 55 bp, the entire mRNA is 3,121 bp in length, and the open reading frame, starting with nucleotide 10 of exon 2, encodes 515 amino acids (mol wt = 58,294).
 Between the human CYP1A2 and CYP1A1 (cytochrome P(1)450) genes, exons 2, 4, 6, and especially 5 are strikingly conserved in both nucleotide similarity and total number of bases.
 Alignment of the upstream sequences and exon 1 of human CYP1A2 with that of mouse or rat CYP1A2 revealed two possibly significant regions of similarity: 1) 68% in the approximately 150 bases immediately 5' from the mRNA cap site and 2) 80% identify between the human -841 to -758 segment and the mouse -1,529 to -1,439 segment.
 The canonical 5-bp box (CACGC), found upstream of all mammalian CYP1A1 genes to date and believed to interact with the inducer.aromatic hydrocarbon receptor complex, was not found on either strand in the 1,906 bp of the 5' flanking region of human CYP1A2.
 In contrast, alignment of the upstream sequences, exon 1, and intron 1 of human CYP1A1 with that of mouse or rat CYP1A1 revealed large, highly conserved regions.
 Conserved regions were found in intron 1 of the human, mouse, and rat CYP1A2 gene.
 These data suggest that the regulatory elements controlling the CYP1A2 gene might differ in location from those controlling the CYP1A1 gene.
 Among 12 human liver samples, striking differences (greater than 15-fold) in the 3.3-kilobase 1A2 mRNA levels were seen.
 This result may reflect significant genetic differences in constitutive and/or inducible CYP1A2 gene expression that could play an important role in individual risk of environmental toxicity or cancer.
Divergent activity profiles of type 1 ryanodine receptor channels carrying malignant hyperthermia and central core disease mutations in the amino-terminal Region.
The type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1) is a Ca2+ release channel in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle and is mutated in several diseases, including malignant hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease (CCD).
 Most MH and CCD mutations cause accelerated Ca2+ release, resulting in abnormal Ca2+ homeostasis in skeletal muscle.
 However, how specific mutations affect the channel to produce different phenotypes is not well understood.
 In this study, we have investigated 11 mutations at 7 different positions in the amino (N)-terminal region of RyR1 (9 MH and 2 MH/CCD mutations) using a heterologous expression system in HEK293 cells.
 In live-cell Ca2+ imaging at room temperature (~25 °C), cells expressing mutant channels exhibited alterations in Ca2+ homeostasis, i.e., an enhanced sensitivity to caffeine, a depletion of Ca2+ in the ER and an increase in resting cytoplasmic Ca2+.
 RyR1 channel activity was quantitatively evaluated by [3H]ryanodine binding and three parameters (sensitivity to activating Ca2+, sensitivity to inactivating Ca2+ and attainable maximum activity, i.e., gain) were obtained by fitting analysis.
 The mutations increased the gain and the sensitivity to activating Ca2+ in a site-specific manner.
 The gain was consistently higher in both MH and MH/CCD mutations.
 Sensitivity to activating Ca2+ was markedly enhanced in MH/CCD mutations.
 The channel activity estimated from the three parameters provides a reasonable explanation to the pathological phenotype assessed by Ca2+ homeostasis.
 These properties were also observed at higher temperatures (~37 °C).
 Our data suggest that divergent activity profiles may cause varied disease phenotypes by specific mutations.
 This approach should be useful for diagnosis and treatment of diseases with mutations in RyR1.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder that occurs in predisposed individuals after exposure to volatile anesthetics or depolarizing muscle relaxants.
 Genetic mutations of ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1), which are considered to cause MH, are found mainly in 3 regions called "hotspots." There are sometimes multiple mutations at the same site of RYR1.
 Although p.Arg2508 of RYR1 is located outside hotspots, several mutations or variants (including the known MH causative mutation p.Arg2508Cys) have been identified in this region.
 We hypothesized that any mutations or variants in RYR1 p.Arg2508 cause important changes in pathological conditions related to MH.
 In this study, we analyzed the functions of 4 different RYR1 variants containing mutations at p.Arg2508.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;We prepared and analyzed the functions of 4 mutated RYR1 genes: p.Arg2508His and p.Arg2508Gly are MH-related variants, whereas p.Arg2508Ser and p.Arg2508Lys have not been previously reported.
 Because the biochemical characteristics of lysine are similar to arginine, we assumed that p.Arg2508Lys RYR1 would have characteristics most similar to those of the wild-type RYR1.
 We introduced these 4 mutated RYR1 genes, p.Arg2508His, p.Arg2508Gly, p.Arg2508Ser, and p.Arg2508Lys into rabbit RYR1 cDNA and transfected the resultant clones into human embryonic kidney 293 cells.
 Using the ratiometric dye Fura-2 AM, we used the 340/380 nm ratio to analyze alterations in calcium homeostasis after stimulation with caffeine and 4-chloro-m-cresol (4CmC).
 We calculated the half-maximal activation concentrations (EC50) of cells transfected with each mutant and compared the EC50 value of cells expressing each mutant with that of cells expressing wild-type RYR1.
 Statistical significance between EC50 values were calculated using an unpaired 2-tailed t test.
 We used 300 different cells, by 30 cells in each of the wild type or mutant.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Cells transfected with each of the 4 mutants, p.Arg2508His, p.Arg2508Gly, p.Arg2508Ser, or p.Arg2508Lys, were more sensitive to caffeine and 4CmC than cells transfected with the wild type (all 4 P ≤ 0.0004).
 Mean ± SD of EC50 values for caffeine of wild type, p.Arg2508His, p.Arg2508Gly, p.Arg2508Ser, and p.Arg2508Lys were 2.53 ± 0.89, 1.72 ± 0.72, 1.73 ± 0.79, 1.69 ± 0.80, and 1.61 ± 0.74 mM, respectively, and those for 4CmC were 125.92 ± 38.11, 70.42 ± 27.09, 79.30 ± 39.04, 73.03 ± 19.20, and 72.81 ± 28.44 mM, respectively.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Any of these 4 mutations in RYR1 p.Arg2508 may cause important changes related to MH.
 Studying the effects of changes in amino acids at 2508 in RYR1 on the movement of this large protein may lead to a better understanding of the pathology of MH events.
Several ryanodine receptor type 1 gene mutations of p.Arg2508 are potential sources of malignant hyperthermia.
The H29D nutation does not enhance cytosolic Ca2+ activation of the cardiac ryanodine receptor.
The N-terminal domain of the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) harbors a large number of naturally occurring mutations that are associated with stress-induced ventricular tachyarrhythmia and sudden death.
 Nearly all these disease-associated N-terminal mutations are located at domain interfaces or buried within domains.
 Mutations at these locations would alter domain-domain interactions or the stability/folding of domains.
 Recently, a novel RyR2 mutation H29D associated with ventricular arrhythmia at rest was found to enhance the activation of single RyR2 channels by diastolic levels of cytosolic Ca2+.
 Unlike other N-terminal disease-associated mutations, the H29D mutation is located on the surface of the N-terminal domain.
 It is unclear how this surface-exposed H29D mutation that does not appear to interact with other parts of the RyR2 structure could alter the intrinsic properties of the channel.
 Here we carried out detailed functional characterization of the RyR2-H29D mutant at the molecular and cellular levels.
 We found that the H29D mutation has no effect on the basal level or the Ca2+ dependent activation of [3H]ryanodine binding to RyR2, the cytosolic Ca2+ activation of single RyR2 channels, or the cytosolic Ca2+- or caffeine-induced Ca2+ release in HEK293 cells.
 In addition, the H29D mutation does not alter the propensity for spontaneous Ca2+ release or the thresholds for Ca2+ release activation or termination.
 Furthermore, the H29D mutation does not have significant impact on the thermal stability of the N-terminal region (residues 1-547) of RyR2.
 Collectively, our data show that the H29D mutation exerts little or no effect on the function of RyR2 or on the folding stability of the N-terminal region.
 Thus, our results provide no evidence that the H29D mutation enhances the cytosolic Ca2+ activation of RyR2.
Aside from the in vitro contracture test, genetic screening for causative RYR1 mutations is the established procedure to diagnose susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia (MH).
 However, currently only 34 out of more than 300 known RYR1 mutations have been confirmed to be causative for MH by experimental studies addressing their functional impact on intracellular calcium homeostasis.
 The RYR1 mutation p.Arg4737Trp has been recently detected in a German MH family.
 To evaluate the effects of that mutation on intracellular calcium handling, the response after stimulation with the RYR1 agonist 4-chloro-m-cresol was investigated in immortalized B lymphocytes containing the p.Arg4737Trp mutation and compared to the response of wild type RYR1 from unaffected family members and unrelated controls.
 Intracellular resting calcium was slightly but significantly elevated in mutation positive cells.
 Calcium release following stimulation with 4-chloro-m-cresol was significantly increased in B lymphocytes carrying the p.Arg4737Trp mutation compared to mutation negative controls.
 Hence, the functional properties of the RYR1 mutation p.Arg4737Trp are consistent with susceptibility to MH.
 Together with previously published data, the mutation has now been reported in three independent MH positive families.
Functional characterization of the RYR1 mutation p.Arg4737Trp associated with susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia.
Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) is a messenger RNA quality-control pathway triggered by SMG1-mediated phosphorylation of the NMD factor UPF1.
 In recent times, the RNA helicase DHX34 was found to promote mRNP remodelling, leading to activation of NMD.
 Here we demonstrate the mechanism by which DHX34 functions in concert with SMG1.
 DHX34 comprises two distinct structural units, a core that binds UPF1 and a protruding carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) that binds the SMG1 kinase, as shown using truncated forms of DHX34 and electron microscopy of the SMG1-DHX34 complex.
 Truncation of the DHX34 CTD does not affect binding to UPF1; however, it compromises DHX34 binding to SMG1 to affect UPF1 phosphorylation and hence abrogate NMD.
 Altogether, these data suggest the existence of a complex comprising SMG1, UPF1 and DHX34, with DHX34 functioning as a scaffold for UPF1 and SMG1.
 This complex promotes UPF1 phosphorylation leading to functional NMD.
The RNA helicase DHX34 functions as a scaffold for SMG1-mediated UPF1 phosphorylation.
Haem-dependent dimerization of PGRMC1/Sigma-2 receptor facilitates cancer proliferation and chemoresistance.
Progesterone-receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1/Sigma-2 receptor) is a haem-containing protein that interacts with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and cytochromes P450 to regulate cancer proliferation and chemoresistance; its structural basis remains unknown.
 Here crystallographic analyses of the PGRMC1 cytosolic domain at 1.95 Å resolution reveal that it forms a stable dimer through stacking interactions of two protruding haem molecules.
 The haem iron is five-coordinated by Tyr113, and the open surface of the haem mediates dimerization.
 Carbon monoxide (CO) interferes with PGRMC1 dimerization by binding to the sixth coordination site of the haem.
 Haem-mediated PGRMC1 dimerization is required for interactions with EGFR and cytochromes P450, cancer proliferation and chemoresistance against anti-cancer drugs; these events are attenuated by either CO or haem deprivation in cancer cells.
 This study demonstrates protein dimerization via haem-haem stacking, which has not been seen in eukaryotes, and provides insights into its functional significance in cancer.
Improved diagnostic yield of neuromuscular disorders applying clinical exome sequencing in patients arising from a consanguineous population.
Neuromuscular diseases (NMDs) include a broad range of disorders affecting muscles, nerves and neuromuscular junctions.
 Their overlapping phenotypes and heterogeneous genetic nature have created challenges in diagnosis which calls for the implementation of massive parallel sequencing as a candidate strategy to increase the diagnostic yield.
 In this study, total of 45 patients, mostly offspring of consanguineous marriages were examined using whole exome sequencing.
 Data analysis was performed to identify the most probable pathogenic rare variants in known NMD genes which led to identification of causal variants for 33 out of 45 patients (73.3%) in the following known genes: CAPN3, Col6A1, Col6A3, DMD, DYSF, FHL1, GJB1, ISPD, LAMA2, LMNA, PLEC1, RYR1, SGCA, SGCB, SYNE1, TNNT1 and 22 novel pathogenic variants were detected.
 Today, the advantage of whole exome sequencing in clinical diagnostic strategies of heterogeneous disorders is clear.
 In this cohort, a diagnostic yield of 73.3% was achieved which is quite high compared to the overall reported diagnostic yield of 25% to 50%.
 This could be explained by the consanguineous background of these patients and is another strong advantage of offering clinical exome sequencing in diagnostic laboratories, especially in populations with high rate of consanguinity.
Cytochrome P-450 hPCN3, a novel cytochrome P-450 IIIA gene product that is differentially expressed in adult human liver.
 cDNA and deduced amino acid sequence and distinct specificities of cDNA-expressed hPCN1 and hPCN3 for the metabolism of steroid hormones and cyclosporine.
Immunoblotting analysis of human liver microsome preparations revealed that human cytochrome P-450 PCN1 (hPCN1, Mr approximately 52,000) was expressed in each of 40 individual specimens examined.
 In about 10-20% of the livers, an immunologically related protein having a lower electrophoretic mobility (Mr approximately 52,500) was also detected.
 A single liver was found that expressed only the lower mobility protein, designated hPCN3, and RNA isolated from this liver was used to construct a lambda gt11 library.
 The library was screened with an hPCN1 cDNA probe resulting in the isolation of a unique full-length cDNA that was sequenced and shown to encode hPCN3.
 The deduced amino acid sequence of this cDNA contained 502 residues, a calculated molecular mass of 57,115 daltons, and displayed 84% similarity with hPCN1.
 The deduced amino-terminal sequence of hPCN3 was identical to that of HFLa, a major cytochrome P-450 expressed in human fetal liver that is immunologically cross-reactive with several family III cytochrome P-450s.
 hPCN1 and hPCN3 cDNAs were expressed in Hep G2 cells using a vaccinia virus expression system and shown to encode active enzymes, both characterized by reduced CO-binding spectra with lambda max at 450 nm.
 Enzymatic analysis revealed that both cytochrome P-450s were similarly active in catalyzing oxidation of the calcium channel blocking drug nifedipine.
 Both enzymes also catalyzed 6 beta-hydroxylation of the steroid hormones testosterone, progesterone, and androstenedione, although hPCN1 exhibited several-fold higher expressed activity than hPCN3.
 Several minor oxidation products of these steroids (e.g.
 15 beta-hydroxytestosterone), comprising up to approximately 20% of the total metabolites, were formed by hPCN1 but not hPCN3, indicating that hPCN3 is a more highly regiospecific monooxygenase catalyst with steroid substrates.
 Clear differences were also detected in their catalytic activities toward the immunosuppressive drug cyclosporine, with two hydroxylated metabolites (M1 and M17) and one demethylated metabolite (M21) formed by hPCN1 but only one metabolite (M1) formed by hPCN3.
 These studies establish that hPCN3 is a newly described cytochrome P-450 that is differentially expressed in the adult human population and that has overlapping substrate specificity compared to hPCN1 for metabolism of steroid and drug substrates.
Genotype-phenotype correlations of malignant hyperthermia and central core disease mutations in the central region of the RYR1 channel.
Type 1 ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is a Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; release channel in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle and is mutated in some muscle diseases, including malignant hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease (CCD).
 Over 200 mutations associated with these diseases have been identified, and most mutations accelerate Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; -induced Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; release (CICR), resulting in abnormal Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; homeostasis in skeletal muscle.
 However, it remains largely unknown how specific mutations cause different phenotypes.
 In this study, we investigated the CICR activity of 14 mutations at 10 different positions in the central region of RYR1 (10 MH and four MH/CCD mutations) using a heterologous expression system in HEK293 cells.
 In live-cell Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; imaging, the mutant channels exhibited an enhanced sensitivity to caffeine, a reduced endoplasmic reticulum Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; content, and an increased resting cytoplasmic Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; level.
 The three parameters for CICR (Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; sensitivity for activation, Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; sensitivity for inactivation, and attainable maximum activity, i.e., gain) were obtained by [&lt;sup&gt;3&lt;/sup&gt; H]ryanodine binding and fitting analysis.
 The mutant channels showed increased gain and Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; sensitivity for activation in a site-specific manner.
 Genotype-phenotype correlations were explained well by the near-atomic structure of RYR1.
 Our data suggest that divergent CICR activity may cause various disease phenotypes by specific mutations.
&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To determine the underlying molecular aetiology in a non-consanguineous Irish family who have had three fetal losses because of a primary myopathy characterised by fetal akinesia, arthrogryposis multiplex, bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia and reduced muscle bulk.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Fetal DNA extracted from amniotic cells was whole genome amplified and subjected to whole exome sequencing.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Whole exome sequencing identified compound heterozygous variants in RYR1 as the cause of the lethal myopathy in this family.
 All three fetuses were compound heterozygous for a paternally inherited missense variant (c.2113G &gt; A; p.Gly705Arg) and a novel maternally inherited truncating frameshift deletion (c.8843delC; p.Ser2948Cysfs*58).
 This family did not have the classic cores and fibre type disproportion typically associated with RYR1 mutation.
 The RYR1 exome finding was made during the couple's third pregnancy and enabled prenatal genetic testing to be undertaken.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;We show that recessive RYR1 mutations can be associated with significant intra-familial variability in clinical presentation which can complicate prediction of clinical outcome.
 RYR1 mutations can also cause diverse muscle pathologies which thwarts diagnosis.
 This study demonstrates the impact that exome-based diagnoses can have for families with lethal disorders.
 © 2016 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.
Intra-familial variability associated with recessive RYR1 mutation diagnosed prenatally by exome sequencing.
Activation of the ATR kinase by the RPA-binding protein ETAA1.
Activation of the ATR kinase following perturbations to DNA replication relies on a complex mechanism involving ATR recruitment to RPA-coated single-stranded DNA via its binding partner ATRIP and stimulation of ATR kinase activity by TopBP1.
 Here, we discovered an independent ATR activation pathway in vertebrates, mediated by the uncharacterized protein ETAA1 (Ewing's tumour-associated antigen 1).
 Human ETAA1 accumulates at DNA damage sites via dual RPA-binding motifs and promotes replication fork progression and integrity, ATR signalling and cell survival after genotoxic insults.
 Mechanistically, this requires a conserved domain in ETAA1 that potently and directly stimulates ATR kinase activity independently of TopBP1.
 Simultaneous loss of ETAA1 and TopBP1 gives rise to synthetic lethality characterized by massive genome instability and abrogation of ATR-dependent signalling.
 Our findings demonstrate that parallel TopBP1- and ETAA1-mediated pathways underlie ATR activation and that their combined action is essential for coping with replication stress.
ETAA1 acts at stalled replication forks to maintain genome integrity.
The ATR checkpoint kinase coordinates cellular responses to DNA replication stress.
 Budding yeast contain three activators of Mec1 (the ATR orthologue); however, only TOPBP1 is known to activate ATR in vertebrates.
 We identified ETAA1 as a replication stress response protein in two proteomic screens.
 ETAA1-deficient cells accumulate double-strand breaks, sister chromatid exchanges, and other hallmarks of genome instability.
 They are also hypersensitive to replication stress and have increased frequencies of replication fork collapse.
 ETAA1 contains two RPA-interaction motifs that localize ETAA1 to stalled replication forks.
 It also interacts with several DNA damage response proteins including the BLM/TOP3α/RMI1/RMI2 and ATR/ATRIP complexes.
 It binds ATR/ATRIP directly using a motif with sequence similarity to the TOPBP1 ATR-activation domain; and like TOPBP1, ETAA1 acts as a direct ATR activator.
 ETAA1 functions in parallel to the TOPBP1/RAD9/HUS1/RAD1 pathway to regulate ATR and maintain genome stability.
 Thus, vertebrate cells contain at least two ATR-activating proteins.
Enhanced cytosolic Ca2+ activation underlies a common defect of central domain cardiac ryanodine receptor mutations linked to arrhythmias.
Recent three-dimensional structural studies reveal that the central domain of ryanodine receptor (RyR) serves as a transducer that converts long-range conformational changes into the gating of the channel pore.
 Interestingly, the central domain encompasses one of the mutation hotspots (corresponding to amino acid residues 3778-4201) that contains a number of cardiac RyR (RyR2) mutations associated with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) and atrial fibrillation (AF).
 However, the functional consequences of these central domain RyR2 mutations are not well understood.
 To gain insights into the impact of the mutation and the role of the central domain in channel function, we generated and characterized eight disease-associated RyR2 mutations in the central domain.
 We found that all eight central domain RyR2 mutations enhanced the Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt;-dependent activation of [&lt;sup&gt;3&lt;/sup&gt;H]ryanodine binding, increased cytosolic Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt;-induced fractional Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; release, and reduced the activation and termination thresholds for spontaneous Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; release in HEK293 cells.
 We also showed that racemic carvedilol and the non-beta-blocking carvedilol enantiomer, (R)-carvedilol, suppressed spontaneous Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; oscillations in HEK293 cells expressing the central domain RyR2 mutations associated with CPVT and AF.
 These data indicate that the central domain is an important determinant of cytosolic Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; activation of RyR2.
 These results also suggest that altered cytosolic Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; activation of RyR2 represents a common defect of RyR2 mutations associated with CPVT and AF, which could potentially be suppressed by carvedilol or (R)-carvedilol.
Intraoperative Presentation of Malignant Hyperthermia (Confirmed by RYR1 Gene Mutation, c.7522C&gt;T; p.R2508C) Leads to Diagnosis of King-Denborough Syndrome in a Child With Hypotonia and Dysmorphic Features: A Case Report.
We present the novel case report of a child with hypotonia and dysmorphic features who developed malignant hyperthermia (MH) intraoperatively.
 Neurology workup revealed the presence of a known causative ryanodine receptor (RYR1) mutation for MH, c.7522C&gt;T; p.R2508C.
 Furthermore, the neurology workup diagnosed the child with King-Denborough syndrome (KDS).
 This particular mutation has never been documented in a patient with KDS.
 Atypical presentation of MH is more likely in patients with RYR1-related myopathy.
 A high index of suspicion for MH in children with myopathy is important.
 The MH hotline was helpful in the management of this patient when it was called after the initial dose of dantrolene.
 A neurology consult was essential for the diagnosis of KDS and future care.
CYP3A4 mutation causes vitamin D-dependent rickets type 3.
Genetic forms of vitamin D-dependent rickets (VDDRs) are due to mutations impairing activation of vitamin D or decreasing vitamin D receptor responsiveness.
 Here we describe two unrelated patients with early-onset rickets, reduced serum levels of the vitamin D metabolites 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, and deficient responsiveness to parent and activated forms of vitamin D.
 Neither patient had a mutation in any genes known to cause VDDR; however, using whole exome sequencing analysis, we identified a recurrent de novo missense mutation, c.902T&gt;C (p.I301T), in CYP3A4 in both subjects that alters the conformation of substrate recognition site 4 (SRS-4).
 In vitro, the mutant CYP3A4 oxidized 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D with 10-fold greater activity than WT CYP3A4 and 2-fold greater activity than CYP24A1, the principal inactivator of vitamin D metabolites.
 As CYP3A4 mutations have not previously been linked to rickets, these findings provide insight into vitamin D metabolism and demonstrate that accelerated inactivation of vitamin D metabolites represents a mechanism for vitamin D deficiency.
&lt;h4&gt;Background and purpose&lt;/h4&gt;Nemaline myopathy (NEM) has been associated with mutations in 12 genes to date.
 However, for some patients diagnosed with NEM, definitive mutations are not identified in the known genes, suggesting that there are other genes involved.
 This study describes compound heterozygosity for rare variants in ryanodine receptor type 3 (RYR3) gene in one such patient.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods and results&lt;/h4&gt;Clinical examination of the patient at 22 years of age revealed a long narrow face, high arched palate and bilateral facial weakness.
 She had proximal weakness in all four limbs, mild scapular winging but no scoliosis.
 Muscle biopsy revealed wide variation in fibre size with type 1 fibre predominance and atrophy.
 Abundant nemaline bodies were located in perinuclear and subsarcolemmal areas, and within the cytoplasm.
 No likely pathogenic mutations in known NEM genes were identified.
 Copy number variation in known NEM genes was excluded by NEM-targeted comparative genomic hybridization array.
 Next-generation sequencing revealed compound heterozygous missense variants in the RYR3 gene.
 RYR3 transcripts are expressed in human fetal and adult skeletal muscle as well as in human brain and cauda equina samples.
 Immunofluorescence of human skeletal muscle revealed a 'single-row' appearance of RYR3, interspersed between the 'double rows' of ryanodine receptor type 1 (RYR1) at each A-I junction.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;The results suggest that variants in RYR3 may cause a recessive muscle disease with pathological features including nemaline bodies.
 We characterize the expression pattern of RYR3 in human skeletal muscle and brain, and the subcellular localization of RYR1 and RYR3 in human skeletal muscle.
Ryanodine receptor type 3 (RYR3) as a novel gene associated with a myopathy with nemaline bodies.
Cloning and isolation of human cytochrome P-450 cDNAs homologous to dioxin-inducible rabbit mRNAs encoding P-450 4 and P-450 6.
Human cytochrome P-450s structurally related to 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-p-dioxin (TCDD)-inducible rabbit P-450 4 and 6 have been cloned from a human liver cDNA library.
 The human P-450 4 cDNA clone, hpP-450 4, and the human P-450 6 cDNA clone, hpP-450 6, were identified by hybridization to rabbit P-450 4 and P-450 6 cDNAs, respectively.
 DNA sequence analysis demonstrates that hpP-450 4 is 83% and 75% homologous to rabbit P-450 4 and P-450 6 mRNAs, respectively, whereas hpP-450 6 is 79% and 72% homologous to rabbit P-450 6 and P-450 4, respectively.
 A comparison of DNA sequence of the two human cDNA clones shows they are 80% homologous.
 This is similar to the homology found between the cDNA sequences of rabbit P-450 4 and P-450 6.
 Northern blot analysis has shown that the human P-450 4 mRNA is approximately 3000 bases, while the human P-450 6 mRNA is 2600 bases in length.
 Clone hpP-450 4 preferentially hybridizes to TCDD-inducible rabbit P-450 4 and mouse P3-450 mRNAs, whereas hpP-450 6 preferentially hybridizes to TCDD-inducible rabbit P-450 6 and mouse P1-450 mRNAs.
 Both hpP-450 4 and hpP-450 6 recognize different genomic fragments, indicating that each is encoded by different genes.
 These results indicate the existence of at least two P-450 genes in humans that are highly homologous to the TCDD-inducible P-450s in rabbits and mice.
An intrinsic S/G2 checkpoint enforced by ATR.
The cell cycle is strictly ordered to ensure faithful genome duplication and chromosome segregation.
 Control mechanisms establish this order by dictating when a cell transitions from one phase to the next.
 Much is known about the control of the G&lt;sub&gt;1&lt;/sub&gt;/S, G&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt;/M, and metaphase/anaphase transitions, but thus far, no control mechanism has been identified for the S/G&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt; transition.
 Here we show that cells transactivate the mitotic gene network as they exit the S phase through a CDK1 (cyclin-dependent kinase 1)-directed FOXM1 phosphorylation switch.
 During normal DNA replication, the checkpoint kinase ATR (ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3-related) is activated by ETAA1 to block this switch until the S phase ends.
 ATR inhibition prematurely activates FOXM1, deregulating the S/G&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt; transition and leading to early mitosis, underreplicated DNA, and DNA damage.
 Thus, ATR couples DNA replication with mitosis and preserves genome integrity by enforcing an S/G&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt; checkpoint.
Progressive nonparoxysmal chorea and dystonia due to myofibrillogenesis regulator-1 gene mutation.
Arthrogryposis is a clinical finding that is present either as a feature of a neuromuscular condition or as part of a systemic disease in over 400 Mendelian conditions.
 The underlying molecular etiology remains largely unknown because of genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity.
 We applied exome sequencing (ES) in a cohort of 89 families with the clinical sign of arthrogryposis.
 Additional molecular techniques including array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) were performed on individuals who were found to have pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) and mosaicism, respectively.
 A molecular diagnosis was established in 65.2% (58/89) of families.
 Eleven out of 58 families (19.0%) showed evidence for potential involvement of pathogenic variation at more than one locus, probably driven by absence of heterozygosity (AOH) burden due to identity-by-descent (IBD).
 RYR3, MYOM2, ERGIC1, SPTBN4, and ABCA7 represent genes, identified in two or more families, for which mutations are probably causative for arthrogryposis.
 We also provide evidence for the involvement of CNVs in the etiology of arthrogryposis and for the idea that both mono-allelic and bi-allelic variants in the same gene cause either similar or distinct syndromes.
 We were able to identify the molecular etiology in nine out of 20 families who underwent reanalysis.
 In summary, our data from family-based ES further delineate the molecular etiology of arthrogryposis, yielded several candidate disease-associated genes, and provide evidence for mutational burden in a biological pathway or network.
 Our study also highlights the importance of reanalysis of individuals with unsolved diagnoses in conjunction with sequencing extended family members.
The Genomics of Arthrogryposis, a Complex Trait: Candidate Genes and Further Evidence for Oligogenic Inheritance.
Cytochrome P-450 in human liver microsomes: high-performance liquid chromatographic isolation of three forms and their characterization.
Three forms of cytochrome P-450, designated as P-450-HM1, P-450-HM2, and P-450-HM3, were isolated from human liver microsomes using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) techniques.
 Each purified preparation showed a single protein band on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).
 From the results of SDS-PAGE, the molecular weights of P-450-HM1, P-450-HM2, and P-450-HM3 were estimated to be 51,000, 54,000, and 52,000, respectively.
 The oxidized absolute spectra of these three forms of cytochrome P-450 showed Soret absorption peaks at around 417 nm, indicating that these forms were in the low spin state.
 In a reconstituted system, P-450-HM1 showed the highest catalytic activities of nifedipine and (S)- or (R)-nilvadipine oxidases.
 The same form showed higher activities of testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylase and progesterone 6 beta- and 16 alpha-hydroxylases.
 P-450-HM2 showed high N-demethylase activities for benz-phetamine and aminopyrine, and also showed the highest activity of testosterone 16 beta-hydroxylase among the three forms, while it did not show detectable activities of testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylase and progesterone 6 beta- and 16 alpha-hydroxylases.
 Anti-P-450-HM1 immunoglobulin G (IgG), but not anti-P-450-HM2 IgG, inhibited the activities of testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylase and nifedipine and nilvadipine oxidases in human liver microsomes.
 Anti-P-450-HM1 IgG was also inhibitory against progesterone 6 beta- and 16 alpha-hydroxylases.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Human P450PCN1: sequence, chromosome localization, and direct evidence through cDNA expression that P450PCN1 is nifedipine oxidase.
P450PCN protein levels and nifedipine oxidase activities were quantitated in 12 human livers and were shown to be highly correlated.
 Antibody against rat P450PCN1 completely inhibited all nifedipine oxidase activity in three human liver samples.
 These results suggest that a human P450 related to rat P450PCN1 is the major form of P450 catalyzing nifedipine oxidation.
 The cDNA for a human P450, designated phPCN1, was isolated from a human liver lambda gt11 cDNA library, and sequenced completely.
 The deduced amino acid sequence is 77% similar to rat P450PCN1.
 By use of the adenovirus- and SV40-based expression vecotr p91023(B), the phP450PCN1 cDNA was expressed in COS cells and had high nifedipine oxidase activity, providing conclusive evidence that this P450 is the primary enzyme associated with metabolism and inactivation of this important drug.
 Using somatic cell hybrids, the P450PCN gene was localized to human chromosome 7.
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a surveillance pathway that degrades aberrant mRNAs and also regulates the expression of a wide range of physiological transcripts.
 RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 AAA-ATPases form an hetero-hexameric ring that is part of several macromolecular complexes such as INO80, SWR1, and R2TP.
 Interestingly, RUVBL1-RUVBL2 ATPase activity is required for NMD activation by an unknown mechanism.
 Here, we show that DHX34, an RNA helicase regulating NMD initiation, directly interacts with RUVBL1-RUVBL2 in vitro and in cells.
 Cryo-EM reveals that DHX34 induces extensive changes in the N-termini of every RUVBL2 subunit in the complex, stabilizing a conformation that does not bind nucleotide and thereby down-regulates ATP hydrolysis of the complex.
 Using ATPase-deficient mutants, we find that DHX34 acts exclusively on the RUVBL2 subunits.
 We propose a model, where DHX34 acts to couple RUVBL1-RUVBL2 ATPase activity to the assembly of factors required to initiate the NMD response.
Regulation of RUVBL1-RUVBL2 AAA-ATPases by the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay factor DHX34, as evidenced by Cryo-EM.
Cardiac ryanodine receptor calcium release deficiency syndrome.
Cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) gain-of-function mutations cause catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, a condition characterized by prominent ventricular ectopy in response to catecholamine stress, which can be reproduced on exercise stress testing (EST).
 However, reports of sudden cardiac death (SCD) have emerged in EST-negative individuals who have loss-of-function (LOF) RyR2 mutations.
 The clinical relevance of RyR2 LOF mutations including their pathogenic mechanism, diagnosis, and treatment are all unknowns.
 Here, we performed clinical and genetic evaluations of individuals who suffered from SCD and harbored an LOF RyR2 mutation.
 We carried out electrophysiological studies using a programed electrical stimulation protocol consisting of a long-burst, long-pause, and short-coupled (LBLPS) ventricular extra-stimulus.
 Linkage analysis of RyR2 LOF mutations in six families revealed a combined logarithm of the odds ratio for linkage score of 11.479 for a condition associated with SCD with negative EST.
 A RyR2 LOF mouse model exhibited no catecholamine-provoked ventricular arrhythmias as in humans but did have substantial cardiac electrophysiological remodeling and an increased propensity for early afterdepolarizations.
 The LBLPS pacing protocol reliably induced ventricular arrhythmias in mice and humans having RyR2 LOF mutations, whose phenotype is otherwise concealed before SCD.
 Furthermore, treatment with quinidine and flecainide abolished LBLPS-induced ventricular arrhythmias in model mice.
 Thus, RyR2 LOF mutations underlie a previously unknown disease entity characterized by SCD with normal EST that we have termed RyR2 Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; release deficiency syndrome (CRDS).
 Our study provides insights into the mechanism of CRDS, reports a specific CRDS diagnostic test, and identifies potentially efficacious anti-CRDS therapies.
UHRF1 (Ubiquitin-like with PHD and ring finger domains 1) regulates DNA methylation and histone modifications and plays a key role in cell proliferation and the DNA damage response.
 However, the function of UHRF2, a paralog of UHRF1, in the DNA damage response remains largely unknown.
 Here, we show that UHRF2 is essential for maintaining cell viability after UV irradiation, as well as for the proliferation of cancer cells.
 UHRF2 was found to physically interact with ATR in a DNA damage-dependent manner through UHRF2's TTD domain.
 In addition, phosphorylation of threonine at position 1989, which is required for UV-induced activation of ATR, was impaired in cells depleted of UHRF2, suggesting that UHRF2 is essential in ATR activation.
 In conclusion, these results suggest a new regulatory mechanism of ATR activation mediated by UHRF2.
UV-induced activation of ATR is mediated by UHRF2.
Complete cDNA sequence of a cytochrome P-450 inducible by glucocorticoids in human liver.
HLp is a human liver cytochrome P-450 that is immunochemically related to the glucocorticoid-inducible liver cytochrome P-450p in the rat and its homologue in the rabbit, P-450 LM3c.
 To investigate the structure and regulation of HLp, we used a monoclonal antibody that recognizes purified HLp to screen a human liver cDNA library in lambda gt11.
 We isolated and sequenced two overlapping cDNA clones that span the entire 2011 bases of an mRNA that codes for a protein of 504 amino acids.
 The predicted amino-terminal amino acid sequence of this protein is identical to the first 20 residues determined from purified HLp.
 HLp mRNA shares more than 70% sequence homology with related proteins from the rat and rabbit but less than 40% homology with other published cytochrome P-450 genes.
 Moreover, Southern blot analysis of human and rat genomic DNA revealed 50 and 60 kilobases of DNA, respectively, hybridizable to the HLp cDNAs.
 Blot analysis of human liver RNA from five patients revealed major (2.2 kilobase) and minor (3.0 kilobase) bands that hybridized to HLp cDNAs.
 The apparent concentration of these hybridizable mRNAs as well as the amounts of immunoreactive HLp protein in microsomes from the same liver were increased in a dose-dependent relationship in three patients who received dexamethasone, a potent glucocorticoid.
 Furthermore, in samples of RNA and of microsomes isolated from cultures of a human hepatoma cell line (Hep G2) incubated for 120 hr in medium containing dexamethasone, there was a 6-fold induction of the two mRNA species hybridizable to HLp cDNAs and a 3-fold induction of immunoreactive HLp protein as compared to the values for cultures incubated in steroid-free medium.
 We conclude that HLp is a human representative of a conserved glucocorticoid-inducible cytochrome P-450 gene family whose mechanism of induction involves accumulation of HLp mRNA.
Human cytochrome P-450 4 mRNA and gene: part of a multigene family that contains Alu sequences in its mRNA.
Several overlapping lambda gt11 cDNA clones have been sequenced and shown to encode for the full-length human cytochrome P-450 4.
 The structure and location of the exons and flanking intron regions were also identified from a lambda EMBL-3 human genomic clone that encodes the full-length human P-450 4 gene.
 The human P-450 4 mRNA is flanked by 62 base pairs of 5'- and 1508 base pairs of 3'-noncoding sequence, with 1548 bases that encode a protein of 516 amino acids (Mr, 58,376).
 The predicted amino acid sequence of human P-450 4 is 69% and 70% homologous to its equivalent in mouse and rat, respectively, 75% homologous to rabbit P-450 4, and 68% homologous to human P1-450.
 The 7.6-kilobase gene encodes 3118 nucleotides of exon sequence that is separated by six introns into seven exons.
 Exon 7, which is 1802 nucleotides, contains three inverse/complement Alu sequences that are organized in tandem.
 Comparison of the genomic DNA sequence of the human P-450 4 gene with the human P1-450 and related genes in rat and mouse and the identification of the amino acid residues and triplet codon at each exon-intron junction show that the location of each intron in the human P-450 4 gene is conserved within this gene family.
 Although the length and homology of the introns within a related gene family may not be conserved, the location of intronic sequences may be an important determinant in the identification of related P-450 genes.
Human liver cytochrome P-450NF is the form of cytochrome P-450 responsible for the oxidation of the calcium-channel blocker nifedipine, which has been reported to show polymorphism in clinical studies.
 By screening a bacteriophage lambda gt11 expression cDNA library, we isolated two clones: NF95 with an insert length of 0.8 kilobases which gave a stable fusion protein and NF25 with an insert length of 2.2 kilobases.
 The two clones were both sequenced and shown to be identical in their overlapping section.
 The sequence of NF25 is 77% similar to that reported for a rat cytochrome "P-450PCN" cDNA (PCN = pregnenolone-16 alpha-carbonitrile).
 The similarity decreases to 45-53% when the sequence is compared to human cytochromes P-450 belonging to other families [i.e., "pH P-450(1)," "P1-450," "P3-450," and "P-450MP." The deduced amino acid sequence is 73% similar to that of rat cytochrome P-450PCN, and the first 21 amino acids are identical to those reported for human liver cytochrome "P-450p." Sections of these clones were nick-translated and used as probes for analyses of human mRNA and genomic DNA.
 The number and size of bands indicate that P-450NF belongs to a multigene family, the so-called pregnenolone-16 alpha-carbonitrile-inducible family.
Isolation and sequence determination of a cDNA clone related to human cytochrome P-450 nifedipine oxidase.
Identification of a human liver cytochrome P-450 homologous to the major isosafrole-inducible cytochrome P-450 in the rat.
The rat 3-methylcholanthrene-inducible family of liver cytochromes P-450 contains two proteins (P-450c and P-450d) that are immunochemically related, possess 68% total sequence homology, and are induced by a number of toxic or carcinogenic compounds.
 To determine whether equivalent isozymes of hepatic cytochrome P-450 are expressed in humans, as they are in several mammalian species, we performed immunoblot analyses on microsomes prepared from 14 human liver specimens and found that each one contained a 52.5-kDa protein (termed HLd) that reacted with antibodies specific for rat P-450d.
 In addition, one specimen contained a 54-kDa protein (termed HLc) that reacted with antibodies specific for rat P-450c.
 HLd was purified through the use of immunoaffinity chromatography and was found to be 56% homologous to rat P-450d and 61% homologous to the equivalent isozyme in the rabbit (P-450 LM4) through their first 18 NH2-terminal amino acids.
 Finally, levels of immunoreactive HLd varied more than 10-fold among these patients but were unrelated to the patients' drug treatments, smoking habits, or amount of immunoreactive HLp, a human liver cytochrome P-450 related to the glucocorticoid-inducible family of rat cytochromes P-450.
 We conclude that, in man, there is a cytochrome P-450 family composed of two isozymes (HLc and HLd) that are immunochemically and structurally related to the 3-methylcholanthrene-inducible family observed in several other species.
Human P(3)450: cDNA and complete protein sequence, repetitive Alu sequences in the 3' nontranslated region, and localization of gene to chromosome 15.
P(1)450 and P(3)450 are the two members of the dioxin-inducible P450 gene family, one of at least eight families in the entire P450 gene superfamily.
 The human P(1)450 gene has been previously sequenced.
 In this report the human liver P(3)450 protein is shown to migrate as a 54-kDa band on NaDodSO4-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
 The human P(3)450 cDNA (3,064 bp) and complete P(3)450 protein (515 residues; Mr = 58,294) were determined.
 The human P(3)450 mRNA (3.3 kb) has an unusually long 3' nontranslated region (1,509 bp) primarily due to the inclusion of four copies of Alu repetitive sequences.
 Comparison of human P(3)450 cDNA with human P(1)450 cDNA and mouse (or rat) P(3)450 cDNA with mouse (or rat) P(1)450 cDNA suggests that an intra-exonic gene conversion event (in the region between 100 and 400 nucleotides from the 5' end of the translated region) most likely occurred between 20 and 80 million years ago.
 Analysis of 32 human X mouse and 23 human X hamster somatic cell hybrids confirm unequivocally that both P(3)450 and P(1)450 reside on human chromosome 15.
Human P3(450): cDNA and complete amino acid sequence.
ATR promotes clearance of damaged DNA and damaged cells by rupturing micronuclei.
The human ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Rad3-related (ATR) kinase functions in the nucleus to protect genomic integrity.
 Micronuclei (MN) arise from genomic and chromosomal instability and cause aneuploidy and chromothripsis, but how MN are removed is poorly understood.
 Here, we show that ATR is active in MN and promotes their rupture in S phase by phosphorylating Lamin A/C at Ser395, which primes Ser392 for CDK1 phosphorylation and destabilizes the MN envelope.
 In cells harboring MN, ATR or CDK1 inhibition reduces MN rupture.
 Consequently, ATR inhibitor (ATRi) diminishes activation of the cytoplasmic DNA sensor cGAS and compromises cGAS-dependent autophagosome accumulation in MN and clearance of micronuclear DNA.
 Furthermore, ATRi reduces cGAS-mediated senescence and killing of MN-bearing cancer cells by natural killer cells.
 Thus, in addition to the canonical ATR signaling pathway, an ATR-CDK1-Lamin A/C axis promotes MN rupture to clear damaged DNA and cells, protecting the genome in cell populations through unexpected cell-autonomous and cell-non-autonomous mechanisms.
DNA damage induces nuclear envelope rupture through ATR-mediated phosphorylation of lamin A/C.
The integrity of the nuclear envelope (NE) is essential for maintaining the structural stability of the nucleus.
 Rupture of the NE has been frequently observed in cancer cells, especially in the context of mechanical challenges, such as physical confinement and migration.
 However, spontaneous NE rupture events, without any obvious physical challenges to the cell, have also been described.
 The molecular mechanism(s) of these spontaneous NE rupture events remain to be explored.
 Here, we show that DNA damage and subsequent ATR activation leads to NE rupture.
 Upon DNA damage, lamin A/C is phosphorylated in an ATR-dependent manner, leading to changes in lamina assembly and, ultimately, NE rupture.
 In addition, we show that cancer cells with intrinsic DNA repair defects undergo frequent events of DNA-damage-induced NE rupture, which renders them extremely sensitive to further NE perturbations.
 Exploiting this NE vulnerability could provide a new angle to complement traditional, DNA-damage-based chemotherapy.
Identification of an inducible form of cytochrome P-450 in human liver.
It has not yet been determined whether human liver contains inducible cytochromes P-450 similar to those that catalyze the oxidative metabolism of foreign substances in animals.
 We carried out immunoblot analyses of liver microsomes isolated from eight patients and found that each contained a cytochrome P-450, termed HLp, that reacted with antibodies directed against P-450p, a rat liver cytochrome that is inducible by the anti-glucocorticoid pregnenolone-16 alpha-carbonitrile, by glucocorticoids, by anti-seizure drugs, and by such macrolide antibiotics as triacetyloleandomycin.
 In the two patients who received dexamethasone and anti-seizure medications and in the one patient who was given triacetyloleandomycin, the concentrations of immunoreactive HLp and the ability to demethylate erythromycin and/or to convert triacetyloleandomycin to a metabolite that forms a spectral complex with cytochrome P-450 heme (catalytic properties unique to P-450p in rat liver) were significantly higher as compared to the values for patients who received no inducing drugs.
 We purified HLp to homogeneity and found that it was immunochemically related to P-450p and to its homologue in the rabbit (LM3c), actively demethylated erythromycin in a reconstituted system, exhibited electrophoretic mobility identical to that of P-450p, and shared 57% homology in its NH2-terminal amino acid sequence with that of a pregnenolone-16 alpha-carbonitrile-inducible rat cytochrome P-450.
 We conclude that HLp is a human representative of the multigene family of the glucocorticoid-inducible cytochromes P-450.
Cloning and sequence analysis of cDNA showed that the brain type of ryanodine receptor (RYR) is expressed in human Jurkat T-lymphocyte cells.
 Fura-2 measurements revealed that the RYR in T-cells functions as a ryanodine-sensitive, caffeine-insensitive Ca2+ release channel.
 Furthermore, ryanodine stimulated proliferation and altered the growth pattern of cultured human T-cells when added together with FK506.
Involvement of the brain type of ryanodine receptor in T-cell proliferation.
Isolation and partial cloning of ryanodine-sensitive Ca2+ release channel protein isoforms from human myometrial smooth muscle.
Partial cDNAs of the ryanodine receptor were cloned using PCR analysis from reverse transcribed total and mRNA, extracted from freshly isolated pregnant, non-pregnant, and cultured human myometrial smooth muscle.
 The identity of these clones was confirmed by nucleotide sequencing of the fragments and indicate the expression of both the skeletal and brain ryanodine receptor isoforms in these preparations.
 In freshly isolated non-pregnant myometrial tissue, membrane fractions displaying specific [3H]ryanodine binding activities were isolated using density gradient centrifugation.
 SDS-PAGE of the sucrose gradient fractions indicated the specific comigration of a polypeptide with a molecular mass of approximately 544 kDa with the ryanodine binding activity.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a rare clinical syndrome, triggered in susceptible subjects by a variety of anaesthetic agents and muscle relaxants, and is the commonest cause of death due to general anaesthesia.
 Previous studies have reported that inherited mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene co-segregated, in some families, with MH susceptibility; lack of linkage between MH and the RYR1 gene in some other families indicates a heterogenous genetic basis for the syndrome.
 The in vitro contracture test (IVCT) on muscle biopsy specimens is considered to be the most reliable test for establishing the diagnosis of MH.
 With the identification of RYR1 point mutations this might in turn result in non-invasive methods for the presymptomatic diagnosis of MH.
 In the present study we investigated four families suspected to be at risk of MH susceptibility; in all subjects histopathological examination and IVCT were performed on muscle biopsy specimens.
 We undertook a mutation analysis of RYR1 gene testing for the presence of five point mutations; in one pedigree a C1840--&gt;T point mutation was detected, strictly segregating with in vitro MH susceptibility.
Ryanodine receptor gene point mutation and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
Mutation screening of the RYR1 gene in malignant hyperthermia: detection of a novel Tyr to Ser mutation in a pedigree with associated central cores.
The ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) has been shown to be mutated in a small number of malignant hyperthermia (MH) pedigrees.
 Missense mutations in this gene have also been identified in two families with central core disease (CCD), a rare myopathy closely associated with MH.
 In an effort to identify other RYR1 mutations responsible for MH and CCD, we used a SSCP approach to screen the RYR1 gene for mutations in a family exhibiting susceptibility to MH (MHS) where some of the MHS individuals display core regions in their muscle.
 Sequence analysis of a unique aberrant SSCP has allowed us to identify a point mutation cosegregating with MHS in the described family.
 The mutation changes a conserved tyrosine residue at position 522 to a serine residue.
 This mutation is positioned relatively close to five of the six MHS/CCD mutations known to date and provides further evidence that MHS/CCD mutations may cluster in the amino terminal region of the RYR1 protein.
Detection of a novel RYR1 mutation in four malignant hyperthermia pedigrees.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalational anaesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants.
 To date, six mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) have been identified in malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) and central core disease (CCD) cases.
 Using SSCP analysis, we have screened the RYR1 gene in affected individuals for novel MHS mutations and have identified a G to A transition mutation which results in the replacement of a conserved Gly at position 2433 with an Arg.
 The Gly2433Arg mutation was present in four of 104 unrelated MHS individuals investigated and was not detected in a normal population sample.
 This mutation is adjacent to the previously identified Arg2434His mutation reported in a CCD/MH family and indicates that there may be a second region in the RYR1 gene where MHS/CCD mutations cluster.
Single strand conformational polymorphism analysis was used to screen exons 43 and 44 in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene from 17 positively diagnosed members of families in which chromosome 19-linked malignant hyperthermia (MH) was segregating.
 A polymorphism in two unrelated individuals was found to result from the substitution of A for G7297, leading to the substitution of Arg for Gly2433.
 This mutation is adjacent to a mutation (Arg2434 to His) previously linked to MH and central core disease (Y.
 Zhang et al., Nature Genet.
 1993, 5, 46-50).
 Subsequent screening showed the presence of the mutation in four of 106 MH families tested and its absence from about 1000 other chromosomes.
 The mutation was present in all six individuals in four families who had had an MH reaction, in two obligate carriers and in 10 individuals diagnosed as MH susceptible by the caffeine/halothane contracture test (CHCT).
 The mutation was present in an individual with a normal response to the CHCT and was absent in three individuals with a positive CHCT response.
 These discrepancies would be consistent with inaccuracies in the CHCT and/or with segregation of a second MH allele within two of the four affected families.
The substitution of Arg for Gly2433 in the human skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor is associated with malignant hyperthermia.
CYP3A4, a major Phase I xenobiotic metabolizing enzyme present in liver, is also present in human small bowel epithelium where it appears to catalyse significant 'first pass' metabolism of some drugs.
 To determine whether CYP3A4 or the related enzymes CYP3A3, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7 are present in other regions of the digestive tract, we used CYP3A-specific antibodies to examine histological sections and epithelial microsomes obtained from a human organ donor.
 CYP3A-related proteins were detected in epithelia throughout the digestive tract and in gastric parietal cells, in pericentral hepatocytes, and in ductular cells of the pancreas.
 Immunoblot analysis suggested that the major CYP3A protein present in liver, jejunum, colon, and pancreas was CYP3A4 or CYP3A3, whereas CYP3A5 was the major protein present in stomach.
 Both CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 mRNA were detectable in all regions of the digestive tract using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR); however, only CYP3A4 could be detected by Northern blot analysis.
 CYP3A7 mRNA was consistently detected only in the liver by PCR and CYP3A3 mRNA was not detected in any of the tissues.
 We conclude that CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 are present throughout the human digestive tract and that differences in the expression of these enzymes may account for inter-organ differences in the metabolism of CYP3A substrates.
CYP3A gene expression in human gut epithelium.
Detection of a novel common mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene in malignant hyperthermia: implications for diagnosis and heterogeneity studies.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalational anaesthetics.
 To date, the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) has been shown to be mutated in a small number of malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) cases.
 To determine if a common RYR1 mutation exists that might account for a significant number of MHS cases, we have investigated the RYR1 gene in unrelated patients for the presence of new mutations by the single-stranded conformation polymorphism method and have identified a novel Gly341Arg mutation which accounts for approximately 10% of Caucasian MHS cases.
 The implications of this common mutation in MHS diagnosis and heterogeneity studies are discussed.
Interindividual variations in human liver cytochrome P-450 enzymes involved in the oxidation of drugs, carcinogens and toxic chemicals: studies with liver microsomes of 30 Japanese and 30 Caucasians.
Interindividual variations in the level and activity of cytochrome P-450 enzymes were investigated in the liver microsomes of 30 Japanese and 30 Caucasian patients.
 The P-450 enzymes used in this study included P-450 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C, 2D6, 2E1 and 3A, and the monooxygenase activities determined were 13 typical P-450 substrates and 9 procarcinogens.
 Although the total P-450 content was higher in Caucasian (mean, 0.43 nmol/mg of protein) than in Japanese populations (mean, 0.26 nmol/mg of protein), the relative levels (percent of total P-450) of individual forms of P-450 determined immunochemically were not very different except that P-450 2A6 and 2B6 levels were higher in the Caucasians.
 About 70% of liver P-450 could be accounted for by P-450 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C, 2D6, 2E1 and 3A proteins, and P-450 3A (about 30% of total P-450) and 2C (about 20%) enzymes were found to be the major forms.
 Considerable levels of P-450 1A2 (about 13%) and 2E1 (about 7%) could be determined, whereas the P-450 2A6 (about 4%), 2D6 (about 2%) and 2B6 (&lt; 1%) were the minor P-450 forms.
 Differences in some of the P-450 1A2-, 2A6-, 2D6-, 2E1- and 3A4-dependent activities were observed in Japanese and Caucasian populations.
 No clear sex-related differences in individual P-450 contents and drug- and carcinogen-metabolizing activities were detected in 60 human samples, except that P-450 1A2-dependent activities were found to be higher in mean than in women in the Caucasian population only.
 A single neonate sample tended to be lower in P-450 1A2-, 2A6- and 2E1-dependent activities.
 In contrast to rat counterparts, we could not detect apparent developmental changes in P-450 content and activity in humans between 12 and 73 years old.
 Thus, the results presented in this study provide useful information for the study of drug biotransformation in humans and for the basis of drug toxicities, carcinogenesis and teratogenesis.
A mutation in the human ryanodine receptor gene associated with central core disease.
Central core disease (CCD) is a morphologically distinct, autosomal dominant myopathy with variable clinical features.
 A close association with malignant hyperthermia (MH) has been identified.
 Since MH and CCD genes have been linked to the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, cDNA sequence analysis was used to search for a causal RYR1 mutation in a CCD individual.
 The only amino acid substitution found was an Arg2434His mutation, resulting from the substitution of A for G7301.
 This mutation was linked to CCD with a lod score of 4.8 at a recombinant fraction of 0.0 in 16 informative meioses in a 130 member family, suggesting a causal relationship to CCD.
Central core disease (CCD) of muscle is an inherited myopathy which is closely associated with malignant hyperthermia (MH) in humans.
 CCD has recently been shown to be tightly linked to the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) and mutations in this gene are known to be present in MH.
 Mutation screening of RYR1 has led to the identification of two previously undescribed mutations in different CCD pedigrees.
 One of these mutations was also detected in an unrelated MH pedigree whose members are asymptomatic of CCD.
 The data suggest a model to explain how a single mutation may result in two apparently distinct clinical phenotypes.
Mutations in the ryanodine receptor gene in central core disease and malignant hyperthermia.
Localization of a novel ryanodine receptor gene (RYR3) to human chromosome 15q14-q15 by in situ hybridization.
Lambda-interacting protein, a novel protein that specifically interacts with the zinc finger domain of the atypical protein kinase C isotype lambda/iota and stimulates its kinase activity in vitro and in vivo.
The members of the atypical subfamily of protein kinase C (PKC) show dramatic structural and functional differences from other PKC isotypes.
 Thus, in contrast to the classical or novel PKCs, they are not activated by diacylglycerol or phorbol esters.
 However, the atypical PKCs are the target of important lipid second messengers such as ceramide, phosphatidic acid, and 3'-phosphoinositides.
 The catalytic and pseudosubstrate sequences in the two atypical PKCs (lambda/iota PKC and zeta PKC) are identical but are significantly different from those of conventional or novel PKCs.
 It has been shown that microinjection of a peptide with the sequence of the pseudosubstrate of the atypical PKC isotypes but not of alpha PKC or epsilon PKC dramatically inhibited maturation and NF-kappa B activation in Xenopus oocytes, as well as reinitiation of DNA synthesis in quiescent mouse fibroblasts.
 This indicates that either or both atypical isoforms are important in cell signalling.
 Besides the pseudosubstrate, the major differences in the sequence between lambda/iota PKC and zeta PKC are located in the regulatory domain.
 Therefore, any functional divergence between the two types of atypical PKCs will presumably reside in that region.
 We report here the molecular characterization of lambda-interacting protein (LIP), a novel protein that specifically interacts with the zinc finger of lambda/iota PKC but not zeta PKC.
 We show in this paper that this interaction is detected not only in vitro but also in vivo, that LIP activates lambda/iota PKC but not zeta PKC in vitro and in vivo, and that this interaction is functionally relevant.
 Thus, expression of LIP leads to the transactivation of a kappa B-dependent promoter in a manner that is dependent on lambda/iota PKC.
 To our knowledge, this is the first report on the cloning and characterization of a protein activator of a PKC that binds to the zinc finger domain, which has so far been considered a site for binding of lipid modulators.
 The fact that LIP binds to lambda/iota PKC but not to the highly related zeta PKC isoform suggests that the specificity of the activation of the members of the different PKC subfamilies will most probably be accounted for by proteins like LIP rather than by lipid activators.
A family of proteins involved in cell cycle progression, DNA recombination, and the detection of DNA damage has been recently identified.
 One of the members of this family, human ATM, is defective in the cells of patients with ataxia telangiectasia and is involved in detection and response of cells to damaged DNA.
 Other members include Mei-41 (Drosophila melanogaster), Mec1p (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), and Rad3 (Schizosaccharomyces pombe), which are required for the S and G2/M checkpoints, as well as FRAP (Homo sapiens) and Torl/2p (S.
 cerevisiae), which are involved in a rapamycin-sensitive pathway leading to G1 cell cycle progression.
 We report here the cloning of a human cDNA encoding a protein with significant homology to members of this family.
 Three overlapping clones isolated from a Jurkat T-cell cDNA library revealed a 7.9-kb open reading frame encoding a protein that we have named FRP1 (FRAP-related protein) with 2644 amino acids and a predicted molecular mass of 301 kDa.
 Using fluorescence in situ hybridization and a full-length cDNA FRP1 clone, the FRP1 gene has been mapped to the chromosomal locus 3q22-q24.
 FRP1 is most closely related to three of the PIK-related kinase family members involved in checkpoint function--Mei-41, Mec1p, and Rad3--and as such may be the functional human counterpart of these proteins.
cDNA cloning and gene mapping of a candidate human cell cycle checkpoint protein.
The RYR1 gene encoding the Ca2+ release channel of human skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum has been cloned and exon/intron boundaries have been determined, together with a minimum of 30 bp of intron sequence flanking each splice junction.
 The gene contains 106 exons, of which two are alternatively spliced.
 The length of the gene, determined by the alignment of 16 genomic phage clones, a cosmid clone, and several long polymerase chain reaction products, is approximately 160 kb.
 Exons range from 15 to 813 bp, while introns range from 85 to about 16,000 bp.
 Analysis of the gene has confirmed published errors in the human RYR1 cDNA and confirmed the structure of two alternatively spliced exons.
 The numbering of the nucleotides comprising the RYR1 cDNA and the numbering of amino acids encoded by them were corrected to account for these earlier errors and omissions.
 Analysis of 2.4 kb of the 5' upstream sequence indicated the presence of a CCAAT box and several Sp1 binding sites between nucleotides -200 and -60 bp, flanking the proposed transcription start site at -130 bp.
 Several other potential transcription factor binding sites were identified throughout the 5' sequence.
 Knowledge of the structure of the RYR1 gene will provide an invaluable resource for the discovery of mutations in the gene that are causal of human malignant hyperthermia and central core disease.
The structural organization of the human skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene.
Rapid Ca2+ efflux from intracellular stores during cardiac muscle excitation-contraction coupling is mediated by the ryanodine-sensitive calcium-release channel, a large homotetrameric complex present in the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
 We report here the identification, primary structure and topological analysis of the ryanodine receptor-calcium release channel from human cardiac muscle (hRyR-2).
 Consistent with sedimentation and immunoblotting studies on the hRyR-2 protein, sequence analysis of ten overlapping cDNA clones reveals an open reading frame of 14901 nucleotides encoding a protein of 4967 amino acid residues with a predicted molecular mass of 564 569 Da for hRyR-2.
 In-frame insertions corresponding to eight and ten amino acid residues were found in two of the ten cDNAs isolated, suggesting that novel, alternatively spliced transcripts of the hRyR-2 gene might exist.
 Six hydrophobic stretches, which are present within the hRyR-2 C-terminal 500 amino acids and are conserved in all RyR sequences, may be involved in forming the transmembrane domain that constitutes the Ca(2+)-conducting pathway, in agreement with competitive ELISA studies with a RyR-2-specific antibody.
 Sequence alignment of hRyR-2 with other RyR isoforms indicates a high level of overall identity within the RyR family, with the exception of two important regions that exhibit substantial variability.
 Phylogenetic analysis suggests that the RyR-2 isoform diverged from a single ancestral gene before the RyR-1 and RyR-3 isoforms to form a distinct branch of the RyR family tree.
The human cardiac muscle ryanodine receptor-calcium release channel: identification, primary structure and topological analysis.
A number of cell-cycle checkpoint genes have been shown to play important roles in meiosis.
 We have characterized the human and mouse counterpart of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe Rad3 protein, named Atr (for ataxia-telangiectasia- and rad3-related), and the protein that is mutated in ataxia-telangiectasia, Atm.
 We demonstrate that ATR mRNA and protein are expressed in human and mouse testis.
 More detailed analysis of specific cells in seminiferous tubules shows localization of Atr to the nuclei of cells in the process of meiosis I.
 Using immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis, we show that Atr and Atm proteins are approximately 300 and 350 kD relative molecular mass, respectively, and further demonstrate that both proteins have associated protein kinase activity.
 Further, we demonstrate that Atr and Atm interact directly with meiotic chromosomes and show complementary localization patterns on synapsing chromosomes.
 Atr is found at sites along unpaired or asynapsed chromosomal axes, whereas Atm is found along synapsed chromosomal axes.
 This is the first demonstration of a nuclear association of Atr and Atm proteins with meiotic chromosomes and suggests a direct role for these proteins in recognizing and responding to DNA strand interruptions that occur during meiotic recombination.
The Atr and Atm protein kinases associate with different sites along meiotically pairing chromosomes.
Identification of human cytochrome P450 isoforms involved in the 3-hydroxylation of quinine by human live microsomes and nine recombinant human cytochromes P450.
Studies using human liver microsomes and nine recombinant human cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms (CYP1A1, 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1 and 3A4) were performed to identify the CYP isoform(s) involved in the major metabolic pathway (3-hydroxylation) of quinine in humans.
 Eadie-Hofstee plots for the formation of 3-hydroxyquinine exhibited apparently monophasic behavior for all of the 10 different microsomal samples studies.
 There was interindividual variability in the kinetic parameters, as follows: 1.8-, 3.2- and 3.5-fold for K(m) Vmax and Vmax/K(m), respectively.
 The mean +/-S.D.
 values for K(m), Vmax and Vmax/K(m) were 106.1 +/- 19.3 microM, 1.33 +/-0.48 nmol/mg protein/min and 12.8 +/-5.1 microliters/mg protein/min, respectively.
 With 10 different human liver microsomes, the relationships between the 3-hydroxylation of quinine and the metabolic activities for substrates of the respective CYP isoforms were evaluated.
 The 3-hydroxylation of quinine showed an excellent correlation (r = 0.986, P &lt; .001) with 6 beta-hydroxylation of testosterone, a marker substrate for CYP3A4.
 A significant correlation (r = 0.768, P &lt; .01) between the quinine 3-hydroxylase and S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase activities was also observed.
 However, no significant correlation existed between the 3-hydroxylation of quinine and the oxidative activities for substrates for CYP1A2 (phenacetin), 2C9 (diclofenac), 2D6 (desipramine) and 2E1 (chlorzoxazone).
 Ketoconazole and troleandomycin (inhibitors of CYP3A4) inhibited the 3-hydroxylation of quinine by human liver microsomes with respective mean IC50 values of 0.026 microM and 28.9 microM.
 Anti-CYP3A antibodies strongly inhibited quinine 3-hydroxylation, whereas weak inhibition was observed in the presence of S-mephenytoin or anti-CYP2C antibodies.
 Among the nine recombinant human CYP isoforms, CYP3A4 exhibited the highest catalytic activity with respect to the 3-hydroxylation of quinine, compared with the minor activity of CYP2C19 and little discernible or no effect of other CYP isoforms.
 Collectively, these data suggest that the 3-hydroxylation of quinine is mediated mainly by CYP3A4 and to a minor extent by CYP2C19.
 Other CYP isoforms used herein appear to be of negligible importance in this major pathway of quinine in humans.
The rad3 gene of Schizosaccharomyces pombe is required for checkpoint pathways that respond to DNA damage and replication blocks.
 We report the complete rad3 gene sequence and show that rad3 is the homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae ESR1 (MEC1/SAD3) and Drosophila melanogaster mei-41 checkpoint genes.
 This establishes Rad3/Mec1 as the only conserved protein which is required for all the DNA structure checkpoints in both yeast model systems.
 Rad3 is an inessential member of the 'lipid kinase' subclass of kinases which includes the ATM protein defective in ataxia telangiectasia patients.
 Mutational analysis indicates that the kinase domain is required for Rad3 function, and immunoprecipitation of overexpressed Rad3 demonstrates an associated protein kinase activity.
 The previous observation that rad3 mutations can be rescued by a truncated clone lacking the kinase domain may be due to intragenic complementation.
 Consistent with this, biochemical data suggest that Rad3 exists in a complex containing multiple copies of Rad3.
 We have identified a novel human gene (ATR) whose product is closely related to Rad3/Esr1p/Mei-41.
 ATR can functionally complement esr1-1 radiation sensitivity in S.
 cerevisiae.
 Together, the structural conservation and functional complementation suggest strongly that the mechanisms underlying the DNA structure checkpoints are conserved throughout evolution.
The Schizosaccharomyces pombe rad3 checkpoint gene.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal, often autosomal dominant, disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalational anesthetics.
 In this article, the authors describe a malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) kindred in which both parents of the proband are MHS and are first-degree cousins.
 Haplotype analysis in this kindred with chromosome 19 linked markers revealed that the proband and another sibling were homozygous for the affected RYR1 allele.
&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Eighteen members of this large pedigree were investigated, with a clinical examination for signs of a myopathy, a caffeine halothane contracture test, a histo-enzymologic study on the muscle biopsies, and linkage analysis on genomic DNA isolated from family blood samples.
 RYR1 cDNA was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and was cloned and sequenced, facilitating mutation detection.
&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Linkage analysis demonstrated linkage between RYR1-linked markers and MH susceptibility in this family.
 DNA sequencing identified a T to C transition at nucleotide position 103, resulting in the substitution of an arginine for cysteine 35, representing the most N-terminal mutation reported to date in the RYR1 gene.
 This mutation segregates fully with the MHS trait, generating a lod score of 4.65 in favor of linkage to MHS at a recombination frequency of 0.0.
&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The proband in this kindred is the first reported homozygote to have presented with an MH episode.
 The homozygotes in this pedigree do not have an overt myopathy.
 The sensitivity of muscle samples to caffeine clearly distinguished the two homozygotes from other heterozygous-susceptible individuals.
 No clear differentiation was observed with the halothane contracture results.
Identification of heterozygous and homozygous individuals with the novel RYR1 mutation Cys35Arg in a large kindred.
Defects in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene are associated with malignant hyperthermia (MH), an autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and one of the main causes of death resulting from anaesthesia.
 Susceptibility to MH (MHS) is determined by the level of tension generated in an in vitro muscle contracture test (IVCT) in response to caffeine and halothane.
 To date, mutation screening of the RYR1 gene in MH families has led to the identification of eight mutations.
 We describe here the identification of a novel mutation, Arg552Trp, in the RYR1 gene, which is clearly linked to the MHS phenotype in a large, well characterised Irish pedigree.
 Considering that the RYR1 protein functions as a tetramer, correlation of the IVCT with the affected and unaffected haplotypes was performed on the pedigree to investigate if the normal RYR1 allele in affected subjects contributes to the variation in the IVCT.
 The results show that the normal RYR1 allele is unlikely to play a role in IVCT variation.
Detection of a novel mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene in an Irish malignant hyperthermia pedigree: correlation of the IVCT response with the affected and unaffected haplotypes.
Differential expression of ryanodine receptor RyR2 mRNA in the non-pregnant and pregnant human myometrium.
We describe here the expression of the ryanodine receptor isoforms RyR2 and RyR3 in human non-pregnant and pregnant (non-labouring) myometrium, and in isolated cultured myometrial cells.
 The mRNA encoding the RyR3 isoform was found in both non-pregnant and pregnant myometrial tissue samples; however, the mRNA for RyR2 was found only in pregnant samples.
 It can be speculated that the appearance of this additional isoform in the pregnant myometrium may increase the ability of this tissue to contract at term.
 Control of expression of the RyR2 gene may therefore be another example of an up-regulated signalling system in pregnancy.
 Although the mRNA for RyR3 was expressed in cultured myometrial cells, the mRNA for RyR2 could not be detected.
 Thus cultured myometrial cells appear to be similar to the non-pregnant myometrium.
 The cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) has been reported to alter RyR mRNA expression in many cell types.
 After treatment with TGF-beta, both RyR2 and RyR3 mRNAs could be detected in cultured myometrial cells.
 These observations support the idea that the expression of the RyR2 isoform is up-regulated both in pregnancy and in TGF-beta-treated cultured myometrial cells.
 Using measurements of 45Ca2+ release, we have further demonstrated that cultured human myometrial cells show a significant augmentation of both the Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR) mechanism and ryanodine-induced Ca2+ release after treatment with TGF-beta.
 Additionally, caffeine was able to induce Ca2+ release and sensitize the CICR mechanism to ryanodine.
 Thus we suggest that the appearance of RyR2 mRNA leads to the expression of this receptor/channel protein with identifiable pharmacological characteristics.
 These results are discussed in the context of the potential role of gene activation in the process of maturation of the human myometrium during pregnancy.
Detection of a novel mutation at amino acid position 614 in the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalation anaesthetics and depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents.
 To date, eight mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) have been identified in malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) and central core disease (CCD) cases.
 We have screened the RYR1 gene in affected individuals for novel MHS mutations by single stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and have identified a G to T transition mutation which results in the replacement of a conserved arginine (Arg) at position 614 with a leucine (Leu).
 The Arg614Leu mutation was present in three unrelated MHS individuals of 151 investigated.
 The mutation was not detected in 148 normal chromosomes and segregated precisely with MHS in family members from one of the probands where DNA was available for analysis.
 This mutation occurs at the same position as the previously identified Arg to Cys mutation reported in all cases of porcine MH and in approximately 5% of human MH.
 A comparison of the phenotypes of the Arg614Leu and Arg614Cys probands is presented.
Molecular cloning and characterization of a human brain ryanodine receptor.
We have cloned and sequenced the cDNA of the human brain ryanodine receptor (RyR3), which is composed of 4866 amino acids and shares characteristic structural features with the rabbit RyR3.
 Northern blot analysis shows that the human RyR3 mRNA is abundantly expressed in hippocampus, caudate nucleus and amygdala as well as in skeletal muscle.
 The human RyR3 mRNA is also detected in several cell lines derived from human brain tumors.
 Functional expression of RyR3 and a chimeric RyR suggests that RyR3 forms a calcium-release channel with a very low Ca2+ sensitivity.
ATR, a phosphatidylinositol kinase-related protein homologous to ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), is important for the survival of human cells following many forms of DNA damage.
 Expression of a kinase-inactive allele of ATR (ATRkd) in human fibroblasts causes increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR), cis-platinum and methyl methanesulfonate, but only slight UV radiation sensitivity.
 ATRkd overexpression abrogates the G2/M arrest after exposure to IR, and overexpression of wild-type ATR complements the radioresistant DNA synthesis phenotype of cells lacking ATM, suggesting a potential functional overlap between these proteins.
 ATRkd overexpression also causes increased sensitivity to hydroxyurea that is associated with microtubule-mediated nuclear abnormalities.
 These observations are consistent with uncoupling of certain mitotic events from the completion of S-phase.
 Thus, ATR is an important component of multiple DNA damage response pathways and may be involved in the DNA replication (S/M) checkpoint.
Overexpression of a kinase-inactive ATR protein causes sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents and defects in cell cycle checkpoints.
Bisallylic carbons of polyunsaturated fatty acids can be hydroxylated in NADPH-dependent reactions in liver microsomes.
 Human recombinant cytochromes P450 and human and rat liver microsomes were assayed for bisallylic hydroxylation activity.
 CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 converted [14C]linoleic acid to 14C-labeled 11-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid (11-HODE), whereas [14C]arachidonic acid was oxygenated by CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 to 14C-labeled 13-hydroxyeicosatrienoic acid (13-HETE), 10-HETE and 7-HETE as determined by HPLC.
 Both substrates were also converted to many other metabolites.
 CYP2C9 appeared to form 12R-HETE and 13-HETE, whereas CYP2C8 formed 13-HETE, 11-HETE and 15-HETE as main monohydroxy metabolites.
 Fetal human liver microsomes metabolized linoleic acid to 11-HODE as a major hydroxy metabolite, whereas arachidonic acid appeared to be hydroxylated at C13, C20 and, to some extent, at C10, C19 and C7.
 Fetal liver microsomes mainly formed 13R-HETE, whereas adult human liver microsomes and CYP1A2 mainly formed 13S-HETE.
 7,8-Benzoflavone (5 microM) and furafylline (20 microM), two inhibitors of CYP1A2, reduced the bisallylic hydroxylation activity of adult human liver microsomes.
 Treatment of rats with erythromycin or dexamethasone induced bisallylic hydroxylation of linoleic acid to 11-HODE in liver microsomes by 2- and 10-fold, respectively.
 The biosynthesis of 11-HODE by microsomes of dexamethasone-treated rats was inhibited by troleandomycin (ED50 = 1 microM) and by polyclonal antibodies against CYP3A1, suggesting that CYP3A1 could catalyze bisallylic hydroxylations in the dexamethasone-treated rat.
 We conclude from steric analysis of 13-HETE and the effects of CYP inhibitors on adult human liver microsomes that CYP1A2 might contribute to its bisallylic hydroxylation activity.
Cytochromes P450 with bisallylic hydroxylation activity on arachidonic and linoleic acids studied with human recombinant enzymes and with human and rat liver microsomes.
Novel mutations at a CpG dinucleotide in the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia.
As a part of our project for accumulating sequence information of the coding regions of unidentified human genes, we herein report the sequence features of 78 new cDNA clones isolated from human brain cDNA libraries as those which may code for large proteins.
 The sequence data showed that the average size of the cDNA inserts and their open reading frames was 6.0 kb and 2.8 kb (925 amino acid residues), respectively, and these clones produced the corresponding sizes of protein products in an in vitro transcription/translation system.
 Homology search against the public databases indicated that the predicted coding sequences of 68 genes contained sequences similar to known genes, 69% of which (47 genes) were related to cell signaling/communication, nucleic acid management, and cell structure/motility.
 The expression profiles of these genes in 14 different tissues have been analyzed by the reverse transcription-coupled polymerase chain reaction method, and 8 genes were found to be predominantly expressed in the brain.
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
 VIII.
 78 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in vitro.
Identification of novel mutations in the ryanodine-receptor gene (RYR1) in malignant hyperthermia: genotype-phenotype correlation.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle that is triggered in genetically predisposed individuals by common anesthetics and muscle relaxants.
 The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is mutated in a number of MH pedigrees, some members of which also have central core disease (CCD), an inherited myopathy closely associated with MH.
 Mutation screening of 6 kb of the RYR1 gene has identified four adjacent novel mutations, C6487T, G6488A, G6502A, and C6617T, which result in the amino acid alterations Arg2163Cys, Arg2163His, Val2168Met, and Thr2206Met, respectively.
 Collectively, these mutations account for 11% of MH cases and identify the gene segment 6400-6700 as a mutation hot spot.
 Correlation analysis of the in vitro contracture-test data available for pedigrees bearing these and other RYR1 mutations showed an exceptionally good correlation between caffeine threshold and tension values, whereas no correlation was observed between halothane threshold and tension values.
 This finding has important ramifications for assignment of the MH-susceptible phenotype, in genotyping studies, and indicates that assessment of recombinant individuals on the basis of caffeine response is justified, whereas assessment on the basis of halothane response may be problematic.
 Interestingly, the data suggest a link between the caffeine threshold and tension values and the MH/CCD phenotype.
cDNA cloning and sequencing of the human ryanodine receptor type 3 (RYR3) reveals a novel alternative splice site in the RYR3 gene.
The human ryanodine receptor type 3 (RYR3) was cloned from a fetal brain cDNA library and its complete sequence was determined (EMBL accession number AJ001515).
 The sequenced cDNA spanned 15,564 bp and contained an open reading frame of 14,613 bp.
 The corresponding protein consisted of 4870 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 552 kDa.
 Amino acid sequence identities to the RYR3 proteins from rabbit, mink, and chicken were 96%, 95%, and 83% respectively.
 A previously unidentified alternative splice site was detected generating a transcript that lacked bases 11,569-11,650 and encoded a truncated protein.
An increasing number of independent studies indicate that the atypical protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms (aPKCs) are critically involved in the control of cell proliferation and survival.
 The aPKCs are targets of important lipid mediators such as ceramide and the products of the PI 3-kinase.
 In addition, the aPKCs have been shown to interact with Ras and with two novel proteins, LIP (lambda-interacting protein; a selective activator of lambda/iotaPKC) and the product of par-4 (a gene induced during apoptosis), which is an inhibitor of both lambda/iotaPKC and zetaPKC.
 LIP and Par-4 interact with the zinc finger domain of the aPKCs where the lipid mediators have been shown to bind.
 Here we report the identification of p62, a previously described phosphotyrosine-independent p56(lck) SH2-interacting protein, as a molecule that interacts potently with the V1 domain of lambda/iotaPKC and, albeit with lower affinity, with zetaPKC.
 We also show in this study that ectopically expressed p62 colocalizes perfectly with both lambda/iotaPKC and zetaPKC.
 Interestingly, the endogenous p62, like the ectopically expressed protein, displays a punctate vesicular pattern and clearly colocalizes with endogenous lambda/iotaPKC and endogenous zetaPKC.
 P62 colocalizes with Rab7 and partially with lamp-1 and limp-II as well as with the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor in activated cells, but not with Rab5 or the transferrin receptor.
 Of functional relevance, expression of dominant negative lambda/iotaPKC, but not of the wild-type enzyme, severely impairs the endocytic membrane transport of the EGF receptor with no effect on the transferrin receptor.
 These findings strongly suggest that the aPKCs are anchored by p62 in the lysosome-targeted endosomal compartment, which seems critical for the control of the growth factor receptor trafficking.
 This is particularly relevant in light of the role played by the aPKCs in mitogenic cell signaling events.
Localization of atypical protein kinase C isoforms into lysosome-targeted endosomes through interaction with p62.
Cellular Ca2+ signalling is an important factor in the control of neuronal metabolism and electrical activity.
 Although the roles of Ca2+-release channels are well established for skeletal and cardiac muscle, less is known about their expression and roles in the central nervous system, especially in the human brain.
 We have isolated partial complementary DNAs derived from the human ryanodine receptor Ca2+-release channel genes (ryr1, ryr2 and ryr3), and examined their expression in the human hippocampus and cerebellum.
 For comparison, we have included in our analysis an inositol trisphosphate Ca2+-release channel type I complementary RNA probe.
 All four messenger RNAs show widespread distribution in the human hippocampus, where ryr2 is the most abundant isoform, and all four are expressed in the human cerebellum.
 However, striking differences were seen between ryr and inositol trisphosphate Ca2+-release channel type I complementary RNA expression in the cerebellum, with inositol trisphosphate Ca2+-release channel type I messenger RNA being largely restricted to, and very highly expressed, in Purkinje cells, whereas ryr1, ryr2 and ryr3 were all expressed predominantly in the granular layer.
 The widespread expression of ryr isoforms in the human hippocampus and cerebellum suggests that ryanodine receptor proteins may have a central role in Ca2+ signalling and Ca2+ homeostasis in the human central nervous system.
 These may include roles in fundamental processes like synaptic plasticity.
 Furthermore, these Ca2+-release channels may be involved in pathogenic processes such as excitotoxicity, where excessive rises in intracellular Ca2+ concentration mediate neuronal cell death.
Partial cloning and differential expression of ryanodine receptor/calcium-release channel genes in human tissues including the hippocampus and cerebellum.
In fission yeast, the rad3 gene product plays a critical role in sensing DNA structure defects and activating damage response pathways.
 A structural homologue of rad3 in humans (ATR) has been identified based on sequence similarity in the protein kinase domain.
 General information regarding ATR expression, protein kinase activity, and cellular localization is known, but its function in human cells remains undetermined.
 In the current study, the ATR protein was examined by gel filtration of protein extracts and was found to exist predominantly as part of a large protein complex.
 A kinase-inactivated form of the ATR gene was prepared by site-directed mutagenesis and was used in transfection experiments to probe the function of this complex.
 Introduction of this kinase-dead ATR into a normal fibroblast cell line, an ATM-deficient fibroblast line derived from a patient with ataxia-telangiectasia, or a p53 mutant cell line all resulted in significant losses in cell viability.
 Clones expressing the kinase-dead ATR displayed increased sensitivity to x-rays and UV and a loss of checkpoint control.
 We conclude that ATR functions as a critical part of a protein complex that mediates responses to ionizing and UV radiation in human cells.
 These responses include effects on cell viability and cell cycle checkpoint control.
Protein kinase mutants of human ATR increase sensitivity to UV and ionizing radiation and abrogate cell cycle checkpoint control.
Inhibition of phosphoinositide 3-kinase related kinases by the radiosensitizing agent wortmannin.
Members of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase related kinase (PIKK) family function in both cell cycle progression and DNA damage-induced cell cycle checkpoints.
 The fungal metabolite, wortmannin, is an effective radiosensitizer that irreversibly inhibits certain members of the PIKK family.
 Based on their roles in DNA damage responses, several PIKKs, DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and the ataxia- and Rad3-related protein (ATR), are potential targets for the radiosensitizing effect of wortmannin.
 In this report, we demonstrate that wortmannin is a relatively potent inhibitor of DNA-PK (IC50, 16 nM) and ATM (IC50, 150 nM) activities, whereas ATR activity is significantly less sensitive to this drug (IC50, 1.8 microM).
 In intact A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells, wortmannin inhibited both DNA-PK and ATM at concentrations that correlated closely with those required for radiosensitization.
 Furthermore, pretreatment of A549 cells with wortmannin resulted in radioresistant DNA synthesis, a characteristic abnormality of ATM-deficient cells.
 These results identify wortmannin as an inhibitor of ATM activity and suggest that ATM and DNA-PK are relevant targets for the radiosensitizing effect of this drug in cancer cells.
Despite a wide interindividual variation of cytochrome P-450 1A2 (CYP1A2) activity, genetic polymorphism of CYP1A2 has not been reported.
 By amplification of exons of CYP1A2 by polymerase chain reaction in eight Chinese subjects, the polymerase chain reaction products were directly sequenced.
 One subject showed heterozygous C2866--&gt;G (Phe21--&gt;Leu) polymorphism.
 DNA from 157 Chinese subjects (104 polychlorinated biphenyl-exposed subjects and 53 control subjects) was screened for polymorphism by single-strand conformation polymorphism method and MboII endonuclease digestion.
 Only 1 of 157 samples showed another heterozygous C2866--&gt;G mutation.
 The subject was previously exposed to polychlorinated biphenyl and showed a value of 3.5% in the caffeine breath test.
 The value is not significantly higher than the mean value of polychlorinated biphenyl-exposed subjects (3.12 +/- 0.29%, mean +/-S.E.M.).
 The incidence of the point mutation in these Chinese subjects is less than 1%.
 The prevalence of the F21L mutation in other ethnic groups and its effect on the metabolic activity of CYP1A2 remain to be further evaluated.
Detection of a novel cytochrome P-450 1A2 polymorphism (F21L) in Chinese.
A role for ATR in the DNA damage-induced phosphorylation of p53.
Phosphorylation at Ser-15 may be a critical event in the up-regulation and functional activation of p53 during cellular stress.
 In this report we provide evidence that the ATM-Rad3-related protein ATR regulates phosphorylation of Ser-15 in DNA-damaged cells.
 Overexpression of catalytically inactive ATR (ATRki) in human fibroblasts inhibited Ser-15 phosphorylation in response to gamma-irradiation and UV light.
 In gamma-irradiated cells, ATRki expression selectively interfered with late-phase Ser-15 phosphorylation, whereas ATRki blocked UV-induced Ser-15 phosphorylation in a time-independent manner.
 ATR phosphorylated p53 at Ser-15 and Ser-37 in vitro, suggesting that p53 is a target for phosphorylation by ATR in DNA-damaged cells.
