Mutation screening of the RYR1 gene and identification of two novel mutations in Italian malignant hyperthermia families.
Point mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene are associated with malignant hyperthermia, an autosomal dominant disorder triggered in susceptible people (MHS) by volatile anaesthetics and depolarising skeletal muscle relaxants. To date, 17 missense point mutations have been identified in the human RYR1 gene by screening of the cDNA obtained from muscle biopsies. Here we report single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) screening for nine of the most frequent RYR1 mutations using genomic DNA isolated from MHS patients. In addition, the Argl63Cys mutation was analysed by restriction enzyme digestion. We analysed 57 unrelated patients and detected seven of the known RYR1 point mutations. Furthermore, we found a new mutation, Arg2454His, segregating with the MHS phenotype in a large pedigree and a novel amino acid substitution at position 2436 in another patient, indicating a 15.8% frequency of these mutations in Italian patients. A new polymorphic site in intron 16 that causes the substitution of a G at position -7 with a C residue was identified.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) in man is an autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle Ca(2+)-regulation. During anesthesia in predisposed individuals, it is triggered by volatile anesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants. In &gt;50% of the families, MH susceptibility is linked to the gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1), the calcium release channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, on chromosome 19q12-13.2. To date, 21 RYR1 mutations have been identified in a number of pedigrees. Four of them are also associated with central core disease (CCD), a congenital myopathy. Screening for these 21 mutations in 105 MH families including 10 CCD families phenotyped by the in vitro contracture test (IVCT) according to the European protocol revealed the following approximate distribution: 9% Arg-614-Cys, 1% Arg-614-Leu, 1% Arg-2163-Cys, 1% Val-2168-Met, 3% Thr-2206-Met and 7% Gly-2434-Arg. In one CCD family, the disease was caused by a recently reported MH mutation, Arg-2454-His. Two novel mutations, Thr-2206-Arg and Arg-2454-Cys were detected, each in a single pedigree. In the 109 individuals of the 25 families with RYR1 mutations cosegregation between genetic result and IVCT was almost perfect, only three genotypes were discordant with the IVCT phenotypes, suggesting a true sensitivity of 98.5% and a specificity of minimally 81.8% for this test. Screening of the transmembraneous region of RYR1 did not yield a new mutation confirming the cytosolic portion of the protein to be of main functional importance for disease pathogenesis.
Screening of the ryanodine receptor gene in 105 malignant hyperthermia families: novel mutations and concordance with the in vitro contracture test.
Novel mutation in the RYR1 gene (R2454C) in a patient with malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia in infancy and identification of novel RYR1 mutation.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) has been reported as non-existent in children less than 1 yr old, although several unconfirmed reports have been published. A case report of MH in a 6-month-old child is presented, with confirmation of MH susceptibility by in vitro contracture testing of quadriceps muscle at 13 yr old. Genetic analysis revealed a novel RYR1 mutation that substitutes arginine 2452 for tryptophan in a region of the calcium channel mutated in several other MH pedigrees.
A novel ryanodine receptor mutation and genotype-phenotype correlation in a large malignant hyperthermia New Zealand Maori pedigree.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder that predisposes to a sometimes fatal hypermetabolic reaction to halogenated anaesthetics. MH is considered to originate from abnormal regulation of skeletal muscle Ca(2+) release. Current diagnosis of MH susceptibility (MHS) relies on in vitro contracture testing (IVCT) of skeletal muscle. The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) encoding the major Ca(2+) release channel in the skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum has been shown to be mutated in a number of MH pedigrees. The large Maori pedigree reported here is the largest MHS pedigree investigated to date and comprises five probands who experienced clinical episodes of MH and 130 members diagnosed by the IVCT. Sequencing of the 15 117 bp RYR1 cDNA in a MHS individual from this pedigree identified a novel C14477T transition that results in a Thr4826 to Ile substitution in the C-terminal region/transmembrane loop of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor. This is the first mutation in the RyR1 C-terminal region associated solely with MHS. Although linkage analysis showed strong linkage (max LOD, 11.103 at theta = 0.133) between the mutation and MHS in the pedigree using the standardized European IVCT phenotyping protocol, 22 MHS recombinants were observed. The relationship between the IVCT response and genotype was explored and showed that as IVCT diagnostic cut-off points were made increasingly stringent, the number of MHS discordants decreased with complete concordance between the presence or absence of the C14477T mutation and MHS and MH normal phenotypes, respectively, using a cut-off of 1.2 g tension at 2.0 mM caffeine and 1.8 g tension at 2.0% halothane. Many MHS pedigrees investigated have been excluded from linkage to the RYR1 gene on the basis of a small number of recombinants; however, the linkage analysis reported here suggests that other recombinant families excluded from linkage to the RYR1 gene may actually demonstrate linkage as the number of members tested within the pedigrees increases. The high number of discordants observed using the standardized diagnostic cut-off points is likely to reflect the presence of a second MHS susceptibility locus in the pedigree.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia type 2 (ARVD2, OMIM 600996) is an autosomal dominant cardiomyopathy, characterized by partial degeneration of the myocardium of the right ventricle, electrical instability and sudden death. The disease locus was mapped to chromosome 1q42--q43. We report here on the physical mapping of the critical ARVD2 region, exclusion of two candidate genes (actinin 2 and nidogen), elucidation of the genomic structure of the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (RYR2) and identification of RYR2 mutations in four independent families. In myocardial cells, the RyR2 protein, activated by Ca(2+), induces the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol. RyR2 is the cardiac counterpart of RyR1, the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor, involved in malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility and in central core disease (CCD). The RyR2 mutations detected in the present study occurred in two highly conserved regions, strictly corresponding to those where mutations causing MH or CCD are clustered in the RYR1 gene. The detection of RyR2 mutations causing ARVD2, reported in this paper, opens the way to pre-symptomatic detection of carriers of the disease in childhood, thus enabling early monitoring and treatment.
Identification of a novel mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) in patients with malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an anesthetic-drug-induced, life-threatening hypermetabolic syndrome caused by abnormal calcium regulation in skeletal muscle. Often inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, MH has linkage to 30 different mutations in the RYR1 gene, which encodes a calcium-release-channel protein found in the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane in skeletal muscle. All published RYR1 mutations exclusively represent single-nucleotide changes. The present report documents, in exon 44 of RYR1 in two unrelated, MH-susceptible families, a 3-bp deletion that results in deletion of a conserved glutamic acid at position 2347. This is the first deletion, in RYR1, found to be associated with MH susceptibility. MH susceptibility was confirmed among some family members by in vitro diagnostic pharmacological contracture testing of biopsied skeletal muscle. Although a single-amino-acid deletion appears to be a subtle change in the protein, the deletion of Glu2347 from RYR1 produces an unusually large electrically evoked contraction tension in MH-positive individuals, suggesting that this deletion produces an alteration in skeletal-muscle calcium regulation, even in the absence of pharmacological agents.
Single-amino-acid deletion in the RYR1 gene, associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and unusual contraction phenotype.
Identification and functional characterization of a novel ryanodine receptor mutation causing malignant hyperthermia in North American and South American families.
Malignant hyperthermia is a pharmacogenetic disorder associated with mutations in Ca(2+) regulatory proteins. It manifests as a hypermetabolic crisis triggered by commonly used anesthetics. Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility is a dominantly inherited predisposition to malignant hyperthermia that can be diagnosed by using caffeine/halothane contracture tests. In a multigenerational North American family with a severe form of malignant hyperthermia that has caused four deaths, a novel RYR1 A2350T missense mutation was identified in all individuals testing positive for malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. The same A2350T mutation was identified in an Argentinean family with two known fatal MH reactions. Functional analysis in HEK-293 cells revealed an altered Ca(2+) dependence and increased caffeine sensitivity of the expressed mutant protein thus confirming the pathogenic potential of the RYR1 A2350T mutation.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a disorder of skeletal muscle manifested as a life-threatening hypermetabolic crisis in susceptible individuals after exposure to inhalational anesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants. Mutations in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) are considered a common cause of the disorder, and, to date, more than 20 RYR1 mutations have been reported in European and Canadian families. Some studies suggest that differences may exist in the frequencies and distribution of mutations in the RYR1 gene between European and North American MH families the frequency and distribution of mutations in the RYR1 gene.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Skeletal muscle samples from 73 unrelated individuals diagnosed as MH susceptible according to the North American MH caffeine-halothane contracture test were studied. Genomic DNA of MH-susceptible patients was investigated by polymerase chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism, single-strand conformation polymorphism, and sequencing analysis. The majority of known RYR1 mutations were analyzed using the restriction fragment length polymorphism method, whereas new mutations were searched by single-strand conformation polymorphism in exons 12, 15, 39, 40, 44, 45, and 46 of the gene.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Seven known RYR1 mutations (Arg163Cys, Gly248Arg, Arg614Cys, Val2168Met, Thr2206Met, Gly2434Arg, and Arg2454His) were detected at frequencies of 2.7, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4, 5.5, and 4.1%, respectively. In addition, three novel amino acid substitutions (Val2214Ile, Ala2367Thr, and Asp2431Asn) were detected at frequency of 1.4% each. These 10 mutations account for 21.9% of the North American MH-susceptible population.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;Three novel candidate mutations in the RYR1 gene were identified in these MH patients. The frequency and distribution of RYR1 mutations observed in this North American MH population was markedly different from that previously identified in Europe. Larger-scale studies are necessary to clarify the type and frequency of mutations in RYR1 associated with MH in North American families.
North American malignant hyperthermia population: screening of the ryanodine receptor gene and identification of novel mutations.
Central core disease (CCD) is an autosomal dominant congenital myopathy. Diagnosis is based on the presence of cores in skeletal muscles. CCD has been linked to the gene encoding the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) and is considered to be an allelic disease of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. However, the report of a recessive form of transmission together with a variable clinical presentation has raised the question of the genetic heterogeneity of the disease. Analyzing a panel of 34 families exclusively recruited on the basis of both clinically and morphologically expressed CCD, 12 different mutations of the C-terminal domain of RYR1 have been identified in 16 unrelated families. Morphological analysis of the patients' muscles showed different aspects of cores, all of them associated with mutations in the C-terminal region of RYR1. Furthermore, we characterized the presence of neomutations in the RyR1 gene in four families. This indicates that neomutations into the RyR1 gene are not a rare event and must be taken into account for genetic studies of families that present with congenital myopathies type 'central core disease'. Three mutations led to the deletion in frame of amino acids. This is the first report of amino acid deletions in RYR1 associated with CCD. According to a four-transmembrane domain model, the mutations concentrated mostly in the myoplasmic and luminal loops linking, respectively, transmembrane domains T1 and T2 or T3 and T4 of RYR1.
The skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1; OMIM 180901) on chromosome 19q13.1 encodes the skeletal muscle calcium release channel. To date, more than 25 missense mutations have been identified in RYR1 and are associated with central core disease (CCD; OMIM 117000) and/or the malignant hyperthermia susceptibility phenotype (MHS1; OMIM 145600). The majority of RYR1 mutations are clustered in the N-terminal hydrophilic domain of the protein. Only four mutations have been identified so far in the highly conserved C-terminal region encoding the luminal/transmembrane domain of the protein which forms the ion pore. Three of these mutations have been found to segregate with pure or mixed forms of CCD. We have screened the C-terminal domain of the RYR1 gene for mutations in 50 European patients, diagnosed clinically and/or histologically as having CCD. We have identified five missense mutations (four of them novel) in 13 index patients. The mutations cluster in exons 101 and 102 and replace amino acids which are conserved in all known vertebrate RYR genes. In order to study the functional effect of these mutations, we have immortalized B-lymphocytes from some of the patients and studied their [Ca(2+)](i) homeostasis. We show that lymphoblasts carrying the newly identified RYR1 mutations exhibit: (i) a release of calcium from intracellular stores in the absence of any pharmacological activators of RYR; (ii) significantly smaller thapsigargin-sensitive intracellular calcium stores, compared to lymphoblasts from control individuals; and (iii) a normal sensitivity of the calcium release to the RYR inhibitor dantrolene. Our data suggest the C-terminal domain of RYR1 as a hot spot for mutations leading to the CCD phenotype. If the functional alterations of mutated RYR channels observed in lymphoblastoid cells are also present in skeletal muscles this could explain the predominant symptom of CCD, i.e. chronic muscle weakness. Finally, the study of calcium homeostasis in lymphoblastoid cells naturally expressing RYR1 mutations offers a novel non-invasive approach to gain insights into the pathogenesis of MH and CCD.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetical complication of general anesthesia resulting from abnormal Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR) via the type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1) in skeletal muscles. In this study, we analyzed the genomic DNAs prepared for determination of all the 106 exons of the RyR1 gene from blood samples donated by two MH patients with extremely high CICR rates in their biopsied skeletal muscles and a clear history of MH incidence. Two novel point mutations were found in the exons 96 and 101 with alterations in the coded amino acids within the C-terminal channel region, i.e., Pro4668 to Ser and Leu4838 to Val. The latter mutation was found in both MH patients. Rabbit RyR1 channels carrying corresponding mutations were expressed in CHO cells for functional assay. It was found that the L to V but not the P to S mutation of the RyR1 resulted in enhanced Ca2+ release activity. These results indicate that the L4838V mutation is responsible for the MH incidence. The L4838V mutation is unique because it is the mutation first found within a hydrophobic transmembrane segment of the channel region and should provide further information on the function of the RyR1 as well as for genetic diagnosis of MH.
Novel mutations in C-terminal channel region of the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia patients.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;The ryanodine receptor of the skeletal muscle (RYR1) seems to be of outstanding importance in the pathogenesis of malignant hyperthermia (MH). It has been shown that point mutations in the RYR1 gene are strongly associated with the MH phenotype. A correctly determined phenotype is the basic prerequisite for adequate genetic MH screening. In this study we examined only those MH susceptible patients for the presence of potential RYR1 mutations who showed strong pathological muscle responses in the in vitro contracture test (IVCT).&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;A total of 56 MHS index patients who complied with the following IVCT criteria were included in the molecular genetic investigation: Contracture forces &gt; or =4 mN at a caffeine concentration of 2.0 mmol/l and &gt; or =8 mN at a halothane concentration of 0.44 mmol/l. DNA sequences of exons 2, 6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 39, 40, 45, 46, 102 of the RYR1 gene were analysed by the direct sequencing technique. Furthermore, if an MH mutation was identified in an index patient, all relatives were screened for their family specific RYR1 defect.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;In 39 index patients an RYR1 mutation was detected: Arg163Cys (n = 2), Asp166Asn (n = 1), Gly341Arg (n = 2), Arg401His (n = 2), Arg614Cys (n = 12), Asp2129Glu (n = 1),Vol2168Met (n = 1), Thr2206Met (n = 9), Ala2428Thr (n = 1), Gly2434Arg (n = 2), Arg2435His (n = 1), Arg2452Trp (n = 1), Arg2454His (n = 4). Three new RYR1 mutations were identified. We found a potential MH mutation in a further 130 relatives of the 39 index patients. Thirty-seven individuals were classified as MHS exclusively by molecular genetic techniques and did not have to undergo the IVCT.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The ascertained high rate of successful MH mutation screening (69.64%) is obviously associated with the more clearly defined MHS diagnosis in the IVCT. According to the EMHG guidelines for the molecular genetic detection of MH susceptibility, a positive MH disposition could be determined in numerous persons by a less invasive technique.
Mutation screening in the ryanodine receptor 1 gene (RYR1) in patients susceptible to malignant hyperthermia who show definite IVCT results: identification of three novel mutations.
Malignant hyperthermia associated with exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis or congenital abnormalities and a novel RYR1 mutation in New Zealand and Australian pedigrees.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is rarely associated with specific myopathies or musculoskeletal abnormalities. Three clinical investigations of MH associated with either non-specific myopathies or congenital disorders in three separate families are presented. Two of these cases also show evidence of exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis. In each case MH susceptibility was confirmed by in vitro contracture testing of quadriceps muscle. DNA sequence analysis of each kindred revealed the presence of a common novel mutation that results in an arginine401-cysteine substitution in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1). Haplotype analysis using chromosome 19q markers indicated that the three families are likely to be unrelated, providing confirmation that the MH/central core disease region 1 of RYR1 is a mutation hot spot.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant disorder that predisposes susceptible individuals to a potentially life-threatening crisis when exposed to commonly used anesthetics. Mutations in the skeletal muscle calcium release channel, ryanodine receptor (RYR1) are associated with MH in over 50% of affected families. Linkage analysis of the RYR1 gene region at 19q13 was performed in a large Brazilian family and a distinct disease co-segregating haplotype was revealed in the majority of members with diagnosis of MH. Subsequent sequencing of RYR1 mutational hot spots revealed a nucleotide substitution of C to T at position 7062, causing a novel amino acid change from Arg2355 to Cys associated with MH in the family. Haplotype analysis of the RYR1 gene area at 19q13 in the family with multiple MH members is an important tool in identification of genetic cause underlying this disease.
Novel skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor mutation in a large Brazilian family with malignant hyperthermia.
Mutations in the RYR1 gene in Italian patients at risk for malignant hyperthermia: evidence for a cluster of novel mutations in the C-terminal region.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS), an uncommon syndrome often inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, is characterized by a genetic and clinical heterogeneity. In this article, the authors described six pedigrees in which both parents of MHS patients were diagnosed with MHS by an diagnostic test. Haplotype and mutation analysis revealed that more than one MHS genetic trait was present in these families.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;A panel of 104 MHS families were investigated with a caffeine halothane contracture test on muscle biopsy specimens. When possible, blood creatine kinase concentrations of MHS patients were measured. Haplotyping studies were conducted with chromosome 19q13.2 polymorphic markers and mutations were searched for in patients' DNA.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;In six families, the diagnostic test and genetic studies demonstrated that both, apparently unrelated, parents of MHS patients were MHS. In three families, homozygous or compound heterozygous individuals for RYR1 mutations were characterized at a molecular level. In one family, a compound heterozygous patient harboring a RYR1 mutation and a CACNA1S mutation was identified. While patients with two mutated alleles did not show differences in their muscle response to halothane or caffeine, their creatinine kinase concentrations were significantly elevated compared with the heterozygous patients.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Based on genetic and diagnostic test data, more than one MHS allele associated with the MHS phenotype was evidenced in four families. These data should be considered in view of the use of genetics for the diagnosis of MHS and when reaching conclusions of genetic heterogeneity in MHS families. Taking into account the usual dominant mode of transmission of MHS and the size of the investigated population, the authors propose an evaluation of the incidence of the MHS in the general population based on genetic data.
Presence of two different genetic traits in malignant hyperthermia families: implication for genetic analysis, diagnosis, and incidence of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a fatal autosomal dominant pharmacogenetic disorder characterized by skeletal muscle hypertonicity that causes a sudden increase in body temperature after exposure to common anesthetic agents. The disease is genetically heterogeneous, with mutations in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) at 19q13.1 accounting for up to 80% of the cases. To date, at least 42 RYR1 mutations have been described that cause MH and/or central core disease. Because the RYR1 gene is huge, containing 106 exons, molecular tests have focused on the regions that are more frequently mutated. Thus the causative defect has been identified in only a fraction of families as linked to chromosome 19q, whereas in others it remains undetected.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;We used denaturing HPLC (DHPLC) to analyze the RYR1 gene. We set up conditions to scan the 27 exons to identify both known and unknown mutations in critical regions of the protein. For each exon, we analyzed members from 52 families with positive in vitro contracture test results, but without preliminary selection by linkage analysis.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;We identified seven different mutations in 11 MH families. Among them, three were novel MH alleles: Arg44Cys, Arg533Cys, and Val2117Leu.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;Because of its sensitivity and speed, DHPLC could be the method of choice for the detection of unknown mutations in the RYR1 gene.
Scanning for mutations of the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene by denaturing HPLC: detection of three novel malignant hyperthermia alleles.
The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is an essential component of the calcium homeostasis of the skeletal muscle in mammals. Inactivation of the RYR1 gene in mice is lethal at birth. In humans only missense and in-frame mutations in the RYR1 gene have been associated so far with various muscle disorders including malignant hyperthermia, central core disease and the moderate form of multi-minicore disease (MmD). We identified a cryptic splicing mutation in the RYR1 gene that resulted in a 90% decrease of the normal RYR1 transcript in skeletal muscle. The 14646+2.99 kb A--&gt;G mutation was associated with the classical form of MmD with ophthalmoplegia, whose genetic basis was previously unknown. The mutation present at a homozygous level was responsible for a massive depletion of the RYR1 protein in skeletal muscle. The mutation was not expressed in lymphoblastoid cells, pointing toward a tissue specific splicing mechanism. This first report of an out-of-frame mutation that affects the amount of RYR1 raised the question of the amount of RYR1 needed for skeletal muscle function in humans.
Detection of a novel ryanodine receptor subtype 1 mutation (R328W) in a malignant hyperthermia family by sequencing of a leukocyte transcript.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;To determine whether malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility in a Canadian pedigree is associated with a mutation in the ryanodine receptor subtype 1 (RYR1) gene, the complete RYR1 transcript obtained from the leukocytes of one MH-susceptible family member was sequenced, using a newly developed protocol.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;RNA was extracted from leukocytes and converted into complementary DNA. Overlapping fragments of RYR1 complementary DNA were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction and used for double-strand sequencing to find a single mutation likely to be causal of MH susceptibility. Inheritance of the mutation in the family was studied by restriction endonuclease analysis and/or sequencing of genomic DNA and compared to available caffeine halothane contracture test data. The mutation was introduced into rabbit RYR1 complementary DNA, the complementary DNA was expressed in human embryonic kidney line 293 cells, and Ca2+ release by the mutant Ca2+ release channel was measured following the addition of caffeine and halothane.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;A novel arginine 328 to tryptophan mutation in RYR1 was detected by direct sequencing of the RYR1 transcript from leukocytes of one MH-susceptible individual. A causal role for this mutation in MH is indicated by cosegregation of the mutation with the MH-susceptible phenotype within the family and by the demonstration that the mutant channel has increased sensitivity to both caffeine and halothane.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The feasibility of using complete RYR1 transcripts from leukocytes for sequence analysis offers an efficient and noninvasive method for scanning RYR1 for novel mutations.
Polymorphisms and deduced amino acid substitutions in the coding sequence of the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene in individuals with malignant hyperthermia.
Twenty-one polymorphic sequence variants of the RYR1 gene, including 13 restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs), were identified by sequence analysis of human ryanodine receptor (RYR1) cDNAs from three individuals predisposed to malignant hyperthermia (MH). All RFLPs were detectable in PCR-amplified products, and their segregation was consistent with our initial finding of linkage to MH in the nine families previously informative for one or more intragenic markers (MacLennan et al., 1990, Nature 343:559-561). Four amino acid substitutions were identified in the study: Arg for Gly248, Cys for Arg470, Leu for Pro1785, and Cys for Gly2059. Of 45 families tested, a single family presented the Arg for Gly248 substitution where it segregated with malignant hyperthermia, making it a candidate mutation for predisposition to MH in man. The other three polymorphic substitutions failed to segregate with malignant hyperthermia in those families in which they occurred, implying that they represent polymorphisms with little or no effect on the function of the RYR1 gene.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is caused by increased calcium release from sarcoplasmic reticulum, triggered by volatile anesthetics or depolarizing muscle relaxants. Numerous mutations associated with MH have been detected in the skeletal muscle type ryanodine receptor gene (RyR1), but so far facilitated calcium release has only been demonstrated for a few of them. This is a prerequisite for confirming the causative role of an RyR1 mutation for MH. Calcium release from sarcoplasmic reticulum induced by 4-chloro-m-cresol (4CmC), caffeine, and halothane was determined in human myotubes by calcium imaging. The RyR1 Ile2182Phe mutation and the RyR1 Gly2375Ala mutation have been identified in individuals susceptible to MH. In myotubes of individuals carrying the RyR1 Ile2182Phe or the RyR1 Gly2375Ala mutation, the EC(50) for caffeine and halothane was reduced; in the Ile2182Phe myotubes, the EC(50) for 4CmC was also reduced, all consistent with facilitated calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. From these data we conclude that both mutations are pathogenic for MH.
Central core disease (CCD) is a dominantly inherited congenital myopathy allelic to malignant hyperthermia (MH) caused by mutations in the RYR1 gene on chromosome 19q13.1. Eleven individuals with RYR1 mutations are described. Four index cases showed features consistent with a congenital myopathy (hypotonia, delayed motor milestones, and skeletal abnormalities including congenital hip dislocation and scoliosis). All four cases and subsequently seven other family members were found to possess novel mutations in the RYR1 gene. The degree of disability varied from one clinically normal individual, to another who had never achieved independent ambulation (the only patient with a de novo mutation). Four cases showed a mild reduction in vital capacity, repeated nocturnal polysomnography showed hypoxaemia in one case. A variety of muscle biopsy features were found; central cores were absent in the youngest case, and the biopsy specimens from two others were more suggestive of mini-core myopathy. In all cases missense mutations in exons 101, 102, and 103 of the RYR1 gene on were found. Future laboratory diagnosis of suspected cases and family members will be less invasive and more accurate with DNA analysis. Clinicians, especially paediatricians and orthopaedic surgeons, should be aware of this disorder because of the potential risk of MH.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Histological anomalies associated with malignant hyperthermia (MH) have been scarcely reported. In some patients susceptible to MH (MHS), central cores have been identified and a genetic association has been proposed, but multiminicore lesions have not been systematically reported.&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To analyze the association between multiminicores and MHS in a large family with MH with an approach combining histology, in vitro contracture tests, and genetic analysis.&lt;h4&gt;Patients and methods&lt;/h4&gt;Twenty-nine members of an MH family (147 members) were investigated.&lt;h4&gt;Main outcome measures&lt;/h4&gt;Muscle biopsy specimens were analyzed histologically and with in vitro contracture tests. Genetic analyses were performed to determine the presence of mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;According to the gold standard in vitro contracture tests, 17 patients were diagnosed as having MHS and 10 as not being susceptible. Multiminicores were found in 16 of the 17 MHS patients and in a single nonsusceptible participant. A linkage between the MH trait and the RYR1 locus in chromosome 19 was demonstrated, whereas no already known mutations were found. Two missense heterozygous mutations (R2676W and T2787S) were identified from sequencing of the entire coding complementary DNA. Overall, we found a significant association between MHS and the presence of multiminicores (chi(2) = 26.5, P&lt;.001) on the one hand and the presence of new mutations in the RYR1 gene (chi(2) = 19.0, P&lt;.001) on the other hand. This remarkably high occurrence of multiminicores in an MHS family is uncommon, and genetic analyses indicate that the association between multiminicores and MHS is linked to a novel R2656W and T2787S substitution present on the same allele of the RYR1 gene.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;These results indicate that multiminicore lesions are observed in MHS patients with neither clinical signs related to multiminicore disease nor histological features of congenital myopathies. These multiminicore lesions may be secondary to mutations in the RYR1 gene. As a consequence, these patients must be distinguished from patients with multiminicore disease and from other MHS patients for whom multiminicores are not observed.
Multiminicore disease in a family susceptible to malignant hyperthermia: histology, in vitro contracture tests, and genetic characterization.
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) and malignant hyperthermia (MH) are autosomal-dominant genetically heterogeneous ion channelopathies. MH has been described in patients with HypoPP, suggesting a potential link between these disorders. However, a common genetic determinant has not been described. With the aim of corroborating this association, four candidate genes were screened in two independent HypoPP patients, one of whom was also diagnosed as MH-susceptible and the other as MH-normal by the in vitro contracture test (IVCT). An A&gt;G change at nucleotide 7025 was detected in the RYR1 gene in the HypoPP/MH-susceptible patient. Detection of the same mutation in three independent MH families suggested that 7025A&gt;G represents a novel MH-susceptibility allele and that MH and HypoPP occurred independently in the case presented. Conclusive evidence in support of the hypothesis that MH and HypoPP are allelic was therefore not obtained.
Mutation analysis of two patients with hypokalemic periodic paralysis and suspected malignant hyperthermia.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle, manifested as a life-threatening hypermetabolic crisis after exposure to anesthetics. Type I ryanodine receptor 1 is the primary gene responsible for susceptibility to MH as well as central core disease, a congenital myopathy that predisposes susceptibility to MH. More than 40 mutations in the RyR1 gene cluster in three coding regions: the N-terminus, central, and C-terminus regions. However, the frequency of mutations in each region has not been studied in the North American MH-susceptible population.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The authors tested 124 unrelated patients with MH susceptibility for the presence of mutations in the N-terminus (exons 2, 6, 9, 11, 12, and 17), central (exons 39, 40, 44, 45, and 46), and C-terminus (exons 95, 100, 101, and 102) regions.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Fourteen mutations have been identified in 29 of 124 MH-susceptible patients (23%). Approximately 70% of the mutations, which include a novel mutation, Ala 2437Val, were in the central region. In 8 patients (28%), mutations were identified in the N-terminus region. Screening the C-terminus region yielded a novel mutation, Leu4824Pro, in a single patient with a diagnosis of central core disease.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The detection rate for mutations is only 23% by screening mutations (or exons) listed in the 2002 North American consensus panel. The implications from this study suggest that testing the central region first is currently the most effective screening strategy for the North American population. Screening more exons in the three hot spots may be needed to find an accurate frequency of mutations in the RyR1 gene.
Malignant hyperthermia in North America: genetic screening of the three hot spots in the type I ryanodine receptor gene.
Correlations between genotype and pharmacological, histological, functional, and clinical phenotypes in malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS) is a subclinical pharmacogenetic disorder caused by an impairment of skeletal muscle calcium homeostasis in response to triggering agents. While in vitro contracture testing (IVCT) is the gold standard for defining MHS, molecular analysis is increasingly used to diagnosis MHS. Mutations associated with MHS have been reported in two genes: RYR1 and CACNA1S. Mutations in RYR1 are also responsible for central core disease (CCD), a myopathy that can be associated with a positive IVCT response. We report here the results of correlation studies performed with molecular, pharmacological, histological, and functional data obtained in 175 families (referred to as confirmed (129) or potential (46) MHS families). Extensive molecular analysis allowed us to identify a variant in 60% of the confirmed MHS families, and resulted in the characterization of 11 new variants in the RYR1 gene. Most mutations clustered to MH1 and MH2 domains of RYR1. Functional analysis allowed us to assign a causative role for seven MHS mutations that we propose to add to the panel of MHS mutations used for genetic testing. The use of genetic data to determine MHS status led to a 99.5% sensitivity for IVCT. IVCT-positive/mutation-negative diagnoses were analyzed not only in terms of specificity for IVCT, but also to assess the presence of a second MHS trait in families, and the genetic heterogeneity of the disease. Histological analyses revealed the presence of cores in more than 20% of muscle biopsies originating from 242 genotyped and tested MHS patients who did not present with clinical symptoms. This indicates that these patients must be considered as MHS patients with cores, and are clearly differentiated from CCD patients who have been tested positive for MHS.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Minicore myopathy (multi-minicore disease [MmD]) is a congenital myopathy characterized by multifocal areas with loss of oxidative activity on muscle biopsy. MmD is clinically heterogeneous and distinct phenotypes have been associated with recessive mutations in either the selenoprotein N (SEPN1) or the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, also implicated in central core disease and malignant hyperthermia. External ophthalmoplegia is an additional finding in a subset of patients with MmD.&lt;h4&gt;Objective&lt;/h4&gt;To clinically and genetically examine families with MmD and external ophthalmoplegia.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The authors investigated 11 affected individuals from 5 unrelated families. Clinical, histopathologic, and imaging studies were performed and RYR1 haplotyping and mutational analysis were carried out.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;All patients had multiple cores involving the entire fiber diameter on longitudinal sections. Weakness and wasting in the shoulder girdle, scoliosis, moderate respiratory impairment, and feeding difficulties were prominent. In contrast to SEPN1-related myopathies, soleus was more severely affected than gastrocnemius on muscle MRI. Haplotyping suggested linkage to the RYR1 locus in informative families and mutational screening revealed four novel RYR1 mutations in three unrelated families; in addition, functional haploinsufficiency was found in one allele of two recessive cases.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;These findings expand the phenotypic spectrum associated with mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene. Recessive mutations of domains commonly affected in malignant hyperthermia appear to be particularly prevalent in multi-minicore disease with external ophthalmoplegia and might suggest a different pathomechanism from that involved in central core disease.
Refinement of diagnostic assays for a probable causal mutation for porcine and human malignant hyperthermia.
The substitutions of T for C1843 in the porcine ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, which deletes a HinPI restriction endonuclease site and creates a HgiAI site, and of T for C1840 in human RYR1, which deletes a RsaI site, lead to Cys for Arg substitutions in the ryanodine receptors and are probable causal mutations for malignant hyperthermia (MH). To improve the restriction endonuclease assay of these sites, thereby providing an accurate, reliable diagnosis for MH, introns flanking the exon containing the mutation were sequenced, permitting identification and PCR amplification of a 659-bp porcine gene sequence that contains both constant and variant HgiAI sites and a 922-bp human gene sequence that contains both constant and variant RsaI sites. As a result, these PCR-amplified sequences contain constant internal controls for the reliable differentiation by restriction endonuclease digestion of normal, heterozygous, and MH genotypes.
Central core disease (CCD) is an autosomal-dominant congenital myopathy, with muscle weakness and malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility. We identified two of nine Brazilian CCD families carrying two mutations in the RYR1 gene. The heterozygous parents were clinically asymptomatic, and patients were mildly affected, differing from the few autosomal-recessive cases described previously. Recessive inheritance in CCD may therefore be more common than previously appreciated, which has important implications for genetic counseling and MH prevention in affected families.
A substitution of cysteine for arginine 614 in the ryanodine receptor is potentially causative of human malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a devastating, potentially lethal response to anesthetics that occurs in genetically predisposed individuals. The skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene has been linked to porcine and human MH. Furthermore, a Cys for Arg substitution tightly linked to, and potentially causative of, porcine MH has been identified in the ryanodine receptor. Analysis of 35 human families predisposed to malignant hyperthermia has revealed the presence, and cosegregation with phenotype, of the corresponding substitution in a single family. This substitution, by analogy to the findings in pig, may be causal for predisposition to MH in this family.
Increasing the number of diagnostic mutations in malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by abnormal calcium homeostasis in skeletal muscle in response to triggering agents. Today, genetic investigations on ryanodine receptor type 1 (RYR1) gene and alpha1 subunit of the dihydropyridine receptor (DHPR) (CACNA1S) gene have improved the procedures associated with MH diagnosis. In approximately 50% of MH cases a causative RYR1 mutation was found. Molecular genetic testing based on RYR1 mutations for MH diagnosis is challenging, because the causative mutations, most of which are private, are distributed throughout the RYR1 gene. A more comprehensive genetic testing procedure is needed. Therefore, we aim to expand the genetic information related to MH and to evaluate the effect of mutations on the MH phenotype. Performing an in-depth mutation screening of the RYR1 transcript sequence in 36 unrelated MH susceptible (MHS) patients, we identified 17 novel, five rare, and eight non-disease-causing variants in 23 patients. The 13 remaining MHS patients presented no known variants, neither in RYR1 nor in the CACNA1S binding regions to RYR1. The 17 novel variants were found to affect highly conserved amino acids and were absent in 100 controls. Excellent genotype-phenotype correlations were found by investigating 21 MHS families-a total of 186 individuals. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) lymphoblastoid cells carrying four of these novel mutations showed abnormal calcium homeostasis. The results of this study contribute to the establishment of a robust genetic testing procedure for MH diagnosis.
&lt;h4&gt;Purpose&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder of intracellular calcium homeostasis with an autosomal dominant inheritance. Most of the reported mutations in exon 47 were identified in Asian patients. However, no functional analysis of p.R2508C has been performed. We therefore conducted a functional analysis of the mutation by altering calcium homeostasis in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells transfected with the p.R2508C mutation in exon 47 of the ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1).&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The entire RYR1 coding region from genomic DNA, which was extracted from the biopsied muscle specimens of two patients, was sequenced. The p.R2508C mutation was introduced into rabbit RYR1 cDNA, and wild-type or p.R2508C mutant cDNAs were transfected into HEK-293 cells. Using the calcium-sensitive probe Fura 2, we utilized the 340/380 nm ratio to analyze alterations in calcium homeostasis following treatment with caffeine and 4-chloro-m-cresol (4CmC).&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Genetic analysis revealed a C--&gt;T point mutation of RYR1 exon 47 at position 7522, resulting in an amino acid exchange of arginine for cysteine at amino acid 2508. The half-maximal activation concentrations (EC(50)) of caffeine and 4CmC for HEK-293 cells transfected with the p.R2508C mutation were 1.86 +/- 0.23 mM and 73.14 +/-19.44 microM, while those for wild-type RYR1 were 2.62 +/-0.23 mM and 179.31 +/-35.23 microM, respectively.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusion&lt;/h4&gt;We demonstrated that the transfected RYR1 mutant was more sensitive to caffeine and 4CmC than wildtype RYR1. These findings suggest that the p.R2508C mutation may be pathogenetic for susceptibility to MH.
Functional properties of RYR1 mutations identified in Swedish patients with malignant hyperthermia and central core disease.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;A diagnosis of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility by in vitro contraction testing can often only be performed at specialized laboratories far away from where patients live. Therefore, we have designed a protocol for genetic screening of the RYR1-cDNA and for functional testing of newly identified ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) gene variants in B lymphocytes isolated from peripheral blood samples drawn at local primary care centers.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;B lymphocytes were isolated for the extraction of RYR1-mRNA and genomic DNA and for establishment of lymphoblastoid B cell lines in 5 patients carrying yet unclassified mutations in the RYR1. The B lymphoblastoid cell lines were used to study resting cytoplasmic calcium concentration, the peak calcium transient induced by the sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca-ATPase inhibitor thapsigargin, and the dose-dependent calcium release induced by the ryanodine receptor agonist 4-chloro-m-cresol.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;It was possible to extract mRNA for cDNA synthesis and to create B lymphocyte clones from all samples. All B lymphoblastoid cell lines carrying RYR1 candidate mutations showed significantly increased resting cytoplasmic calcium levels as well as a shift to lower concentrations of 4-chloro-m-cresol inducing calcium release compared with controls.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Peripheral blood samples are stable regarding RNA and DNA extraction and establishment of lymphoblastoid B cell lines after transportation at ambient temperature over large distances by ordinary mail. Functional tests on B cells harboring the newly identified amino acid substitutions indicate that they alter intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis and are most likely causative of malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle characterized by disturbance of intracellular calcium homeostasis in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Mutations of the ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) gene account for most cases, with some studies claiming up to 86% of mutations in this locus. However, RYR1 gene is large and variants are common even in the normal population. We examined 54 families with MH susceptibility and 21 diagnosed with equivocal MH. Thirty-five were selected for an anesthetic reaction, whereas the remainder for hyperCKemia. In these, we studied all 106 exons of the RYR1 gene. When no mutation was found, we also screened: sodium channel voltage-gated, type IV alpha subunit (SCN4A), calcium channel voltage-dependent, L type, alpha 1S subunit (CACNA1S), and L-type voltage-gated calcium channel alpha 2/delta-subunit (CACNL2A). Twenty-nine different RYR1 mutations were discovered in 40 families. Three other MH genes were tested in negative cases. Fourteen RYR1 amino acid changes were novel, of which 12 were located outside the mutational 'hot spots'. In two families, the known mutation p.R3903Q was also observed in malignant hyperthermia-nonsusceptible (MHN) individuals. Unexpectedly, four changes were also found in the same family and two in another. Our study confirms that MH is genetically heterogeneous and that a consistent number of cases are not due to RYR1 mutations. The discordance between in vitro contracture test status and the presence of a proven causative RYR1 mutation suggests that the penetrance may vary due to as yet unknown factors.
Novel missense mutations and unexpected multiple changes of RYR1 gene in 75 malignant hyperthermia families.
Ryanodine receptors (RyRs) are located in the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum membrane and are responsible for the release of Ca(2+) from intracellular stores during excitation-contraction coupling in both cardiac and skeletal muscle. RyRs are the largest known ion channels (&gt; 2MDa) and exist as three mammalian isoforms (RyR 1-3), all of which are homotetrameric proteins that interact with and are regulated by phosphorylation, redox modifications, and a variety of small proteins and ions. Most RyR channel modulators interact with the large cytoplasmic domain whereas the carboxy-terminal portion of the protein forms the ion-conducting pore. Mutations in RyR2 are associated with human disorders such as catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia whereas mutations in RyR1 underlie diseases such as central core disease and malignant hyperthermia. This chapter examines the current concepts of the structure, function and regulation of RyRs and assesses the current state of understanding of their roles in associated disorders.
King-Denborough syndrome (KDS), first described in 1973, is a rare condition characterised by the triad of dysmorphic features, myopathy, and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS). Autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expressivity has been reported in several cases. Mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene have been implicated in a wide range of myopathies such as central core disease (CCD), the malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility trait and one isolated patient with KDS. Here we report clinical, pathologic and genetic features of four unrelated patients with KDS. Patients had a relatively uniform clinical presentation but muscle biopsy findings were highly variable. Heterozygous missense mutations in RYR1 were uncovered in three out of four families, of which one mutation was novel and two have previously been reported in MH. Further RyR1 protein expression studies performed in two families showed marked reduction of the RyR1 protein, indicating the presence of allelic RYR1 mutations not detectable on routine sequencing and potentially explaining marked intrafamilial variability. Our findings support the hypothesis that RYR1 mutations are associated with King-Denborough syndrome but that further genetic heterogeneity is likely.
&lt;h4&gt;Introduction&lt;/h4&gt;Ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) mutations have been associated with central core disease (CCD), multiminicore/minicore/multicore disease (MmD), and susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia (MH).&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Patients with muscle symptoms in adulthood, who had features compatible with CCD/MmD, underwent clinical, histological, and genetic (RYR1 and SEPN1 genes) evaluations. Published cases of CCD and MmD with adult onset were also reviewed.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Eight patients fulfilled the criteria for further analysis. Five RYR1 mutations, 4 of them unreported, were detected in 3 patients. Compound heterozygosity was proven in 1 case.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;To our knowledge, this is the only report of adult onset associated with recessive RYR1 mutations and central core/multiminicores on muscle biopsy. Although adult patients with CCD, MmD, and minimally symptomatic MH with abnormal muscle biopsy findings usually have a mild clinical course, differential diagnosis and carrier screening is crucial for prevention of potentially life-threatening reactions to general anesthesia.
Congenital myopathies describe a group of inherited muscle disorders with neonatal or infantile onset typically associated with muscle weakness, respiratory involvement and delayed motor milestones. We previously reported a novel congenital myopathy in an inbred Samaritan family. All patients displayed severe neonatal hypotonia and respiratory distress, and unlike other congenital myopathies, a constantly improving health status. As clinical and pathological data did not point to preferential candidate genes, we performed exome sequencing complemented by linkage analysis to identify the mutation causing the benign Samaritan congenital myopathy. We identified the homozygous p.Tyr1088Cys mutation in RYR1, encoding the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor. This sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium channel is a key regulator of excitation-contraction coupling (ECC). Western blot and immunohistofluorescence revealed a significant decrease of the RYR1 protein level and an abnormal organization of skeletal muscle triad markers as caveolin-3, dysferlin and amphiphysin 2. RYR1 mutations are associated with different myopathies and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. The index patient had mild hyperthermia following anesthesia, indicating that the inbred Samaritan population might be a risk group for this disorder. Our results suggest an aberrant ECC as the primary cause of this disease, and broaden the clinical consequences of RYR1 defects.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Mutations in the ryanodine receptor type 1 gene (RYR1) that encodes the skeletal muscle-specific intracellular calcium (Ca(2+)) release channel are a cause of malignant hyperthermia (MH). In this study, we examined RYR1 mutations in a large number of North American MH-susceptible (MHS) subjects without prior genetic diagnosis.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;RYR1 was examined in 120 unrelated MHS subjects from the United States in a tiered manner. The α-1 subunit of the dihydropyridine receptor gene (CACNA1S) was screened for 4 variants in subjects in whom no abnormality was found in ≥ 100 exons of RYR1.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Ten known causative MH mutations were found in 26 subjects. Variants of uncertain significance in RYR1 were found in 36 subjects, 16 of which are novel. Novel variants in both RYR1 and CACNA1S were found in the 1 subject who died of MH. Two RYR1 variants were found in 4 subjects. Variants of uncertain significance were found outside and inside the hotspots of RYR1. Maximal contractures in the caffeine-halothane contracture test were greater in those who had a known MH mutation or variant of uncertain significance in RYR1 than in those who did not.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The identification of novel RYR1 variants and previously observed RYR1 variants of uncertain significance in independent MHS families is necessary for demonstrating the significance of these variants for MH susceptibility and supports the need for functional studies of these variants. Continued reporting of the clinical phenotypes of MH is necessary for interpretation of genetic findings, especially because the pathogenicity of most of these genetic variants associated with MHS remains to be elucidated.
Ryanodine receptor type 1 gene variants in the malignant hyperthermia-susceptible population of the United States.
Exome sequencing reveals novel rare variants in the ryanodine receptor and calcium channel genes in malignant hyperthermia families.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;About half of malignant hyperthermia (MH) cases are associated with skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) and calcium channel, voltage-dependent, L type, α1S subunit (CACNA1S) gene mutations, leaving many with an unknown cause. The authors chose to apply a sequencing approach to uncover causal variants in unknown cases. Sequencing the exome, the protein-coding region of the genome, has power at low sample sizes and identified the cause of over a dozen Mendelian disorders.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;The authors considered four families with multiple MH cases lacking mutations in RYR1 and CACNA1S by Sanger sequencing of complementary DNA. Exome sequencing in two affecteds per family, chosen for maximum genetic distance, were compared. Variants were ranked by allele frequency, protein change, and measures of conservation among mammals to assess likelihood of causation. Finally, putative pathogenic mutations were genotyped in other family members to verify cosegregation with MH.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Exome sequencing revealed one rare RYR1 nonsynonymous variant in each of three families (Asp1056His, Val2627Met, Val4234Leu), and one CACNA1S variant (Thr1009Lys) in the fourth family. These were not seen in variant databases or in our control population sample of 5,379 exomes. Follow-up sequencing in other family members verified cosegregation of alleles with MH.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The authors found that using both exome sequencing and allele frequency data from large sequencing efforts may aid genetic diagnosis of MH. In a sample selected by the authors, this technique was more sensitive for variant detection in known genes than Sanger sequencing of complementary DNA, and allows for the possibility of novel gene discovery.
Divergent activity profiles of type 1 ryanodine receptor channels carrying malignant hyperthermia and central core disease mutations in the amino-terminal Region.
The type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1) is a Ca2+ release channel in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle and is mutated in several diseases, including malignant hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease (CCD). Most MH and CCD mutations cause accelerated Ca2+ release, resulting in abnormal Ca2+ homeostasis in skeletal muscle. However, how specific mutations affect the channel to produce different phenotypes is not well understood. In this study, we have investigated 11 mutations at 7 different positions in the amino (N)-terminal region of RyR1 (9 MH and 2 MH/CCD mutations) using a heterologous expression system in HEK293 cells. In live-cell Ca2+ imaging at room temperature (~25 °C), cells expressing mutant channels exhibited alterations in Ca2+ homeostasis, i.e., an enhanced sensitivity to caffeine, a depletion of Ca2+ in the ER and an increase in resting cytoplasmic Ca2+. RyR1 channel activity was quantitatively evaluated by [3H]ryanodine binding and three parameters (sensitivity to activating Ca2+, sensitivity to inactivating Ca2+ and attainable maximum activity, i.e., gain) were obtained by fitting analysis. The mutations increased the gain and the sensitivity to activating Ca2+ in a site-specific manner. The gain was consistently higher in both MH and MH/CCD mutations. Sensitivity to activating Ca2+ was markedly enhanced in MH/CCD mutations. The channel activity estimated from the three parameters provides a reasonable explanation to the pathological phenotype assessed by Ca2+ homeostasis. These properties were also observed at higher temperatures (~37 °C). Our data suggest that divergent activity profiles may cause varied disease phenotypes by specific mutations. This approach should be useful for diagnosis and treatment of diseases with mutations in RyR1.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder that occurs in predisposed individuals after exposure to volatile anesthetics or depolarizing muscle relaxants. Genetic mutations of ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1), which are considered to cause MH, are found mainly in 3 regions called "hotspots." There are sometimes multiple mutations at the same site of RYR1. Although p.Arg2508 of RYR1 is located outside hotspots, several mutations or variants (including the known MH causative mutation p.Arg2508Cys) have been identified in this region. We hypothesized that any mutations or variants in RYR1 p.Arg2508 cause important changes in pathological conditions related to MH. In this study, we analyzed the functions of 4 different RYR1 variants containing mutations at p.Arg2508.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;We prepared and analyzed the functions of 4 mutated RYR1 genes: p.Arg2508His and p.Arg2508Gly are MH-related variants, whereas p.Arg2508Ser and p.Arg2508Lys have not been previously reported. Because the biochemical characteristics of lysine are similar to arginine, we assumed that p.Arg2508Lys RYR1 would have characteristics most similar to those of the wild-type RYR1. We introduced these 4 mutated RYR1 genes, p.Arg2508His, p.Arg2508Gly, p.Arg2508Ser, and p.Arg2508Lys into rabbit RYR1 cDNA and transfected the resultant clones into human embryonic kidney 293 cells. Using the ratiometric dye Fura-2 AM, we used the 340/380 nm ratio to analyze alterations in calcium homeostasis after stimulation with caffeine and 4-chloro-m-cresol (4CmC). We calculated the half-maximal activation concentrations (EC50) of cells transfected with each mutant and compared the EC50 value of cells expressing each mutant with that of cells expressing wild-type RYR1. Statistical significance between EC50 values were calculated using an unpaired 2-tailed t test. We used 300 different cells, by 30 cells in each of the wild type or mutant.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Cells transfected with each of the 4 mutants, p.Arg2508His, p.Arg2508Gly, p.Arg2508Ser, or p.Arg2508Lys, were more sensitive to caffeine and 4CmC than cells transfected with the wild type (all 4 P ≤ 0.0004). Mean ± SD of EC50 values for caffeine of wild type, p.Arg2508His, p.Arg2508Gly, p.Arg2508Ser, and p.Arg2508Lys were 2.53 ± 0.89, 1.72 ± 0.72, 1.73 ± 0.79, 1.69 ± 0.80, and 1.61 ± 0.74 mM, respectively, and those for 4CmC were 125.92 ± 38.11, 70.42 ± 27.09, 79.30 ± 39.04, 73.03 ± 19.20, and 72.81 ± 28.44 mM, respectively.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;Any of these 4 mutations in RYR1 p.Arg2508 may cause important changes related to MH. Studying the effects of changes in amino acids at 2508 in RYR1 on the movement of this large protein may lead to a better understanding of the pathology of MH events.
Several ryanodine receptor type 1 gene mutations of p.Arg2508 are potential sources of malignant hyperthermia.
Aside from the in vitro contracture test, genetic screening for causative RYR1 mutations is the established procedure to diagnose susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia (MH). However, currently only 34 out of more than 300 known RYR1 mutations have been confirmed to be causative for MH by experimental studies addressing their functional impact on intracellular calcium homeostasis. The RYR1 mutation p.Arg4737Trp has been recently detected in a German MH family. To evaluate the effects of that mutation on intracellular calcium handling, the response after stimulation with the RYR1 agonist 4-chloro-m-cresol was investigated in immortalized B lymphocytes containing the p.Arg4737Trp mutation and compared to the response of wild type RYR1 from unaffected family members and unrelated controls. Intracellular resting calcium was slightly but significantly elevated in mutation positive cells. Calcium release following stimulation with 4-chloro-m-cresol was significantly increased in B lymphocytes carrying the p.Arg4737Trp mutation compared to mutation negative controls. Hence, the functional properties of the RYR1 mutation p.Arg4737Trp are consistent with susceptibility to MH. Together with previously published data, the mutation has now been reported in three independent MH positive families.
Functional characterization of the RYR1 mutation p.Arg4737Trp associated with susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia.
Genotype-phenotype correlations of malignant hyperthermia and central core disease mutations in the central region of the RYR1 channel.
Type 1 ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is a Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; release channel in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle and is mutated in some muscle diseases, including malignant hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease (CCD). Over 200 mutations associated with these diseases have been identified, and most mutations accelerate Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; -induced Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; release (CICR), resulting in abnormal Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; homeostasis in skeletal muscle. However, it remains largely unknown how specific mutations cause different phenotypes. In this study, we investigated the CICR activity of 14 mutations at 10 different positions in the central region of RYR1 (10 MH and four MH/CCD mutations) using a heterologous expression system in HEK293 cells. In live-cell Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; imaging, the mutant channels exhibited an enhanced sensitivity to caffeine, a reduced endoplasmic reticulum Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; content, and an increased resting cytoplasmic Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; level. The three parameters for CICR (Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; sensitivity for activation, Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; sensitivity for inactivation, and attainable maximum activity, i.e., gain) were obtained by [&lt;sup&gt;3&lt;/sup&gt; H]ryanodine binding and fitting analysis. The mutant channels showed increased gain and Ca&lt;sup&gt;2+&lt;/sup&gt; sensitivity for activation in a site-specific manner. Genotype-phenotype correlations were explained well by the near-atomic structure of RYR1. Our data suggest that divergent CICR activity may cause various disease phenotypes by specific mutations.
We present the novel case report of a child with hypotonia and dysmorphic features who developed malignant hyperthermia (MH) intraoperatively. Neurology workup revealed the presence of a known causative ryanodine receptor (RYR1) mutation for MH, c.7522C&gt;T; p.R2508C. Furthermore, the neurology workup diagnosed the child with King-Denborough syndrome (KDS). This particular mutation has never been documented in a patient with KDS. Atypical presentation of MH is more likely in patients with RYR1-related myopathy. A high index of suspicion for MH in children with myopathy is important. The MH hotline was helpful in the management of this patient when it was called after the initial dose of dantrolene. A neurology consult was essential for the diagnosis of KDS and future care.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a rare clinical syndrome, triggered in susceptible subjects by a variety of anaesthetic agents and muscle relaxants, and is the commonest cause of death due to general anaesthesia. Previous studies have reported that inherited mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene co-segregated, in some families, with MH susceptibility; lack of linkage between MH and the RYR1 gene in some other families indicates a heterogenous genetic basis for the syndrome. The in vitro contracture test (IVCT) on muscle biopsy specimens is considered to be the most reliable test for establishing the diagnosis of MH. With the identification of RYR1 point mutations this might in turn result in non-invasive methods for the presymptomatic diagnosis of MH. In the present study we investigated four families suspected to be at risk of MH susceptibility; in all subjects histopathological examination and IVCT were performed on muscle biopsy specimens. We undertook a mutation analysis of RYR1 gene testing for the presence of five point mutations; in one pedigree a C1840--&gt;T point mutation was detected, strictly segregating with in vitro MH susceptibility.
Ryanodine receptor gene point mutation and malignant hyperthermia susceptibility.
Mutation screening of the RYR1 gene in malignant hyperthermia: detection of a novel Tyr to Ser mutation in a pedigree with associated central cores.
The ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) has been shown to be mutated in a small number of malignant hyperthermia (MH) pedigrees. Missense mutations in this gene have also been identified in two families with central core disease (CCD), a rare myopathy closely associated with MH. In an effort to identify other RYR1 mutations responsible for MH and CCD, we used a SSCP approach to screen the RYR1 gene for mutations in a family exhibiting susceptibility to MH (MHS) where some of the MHS individuals display core regions in their muscle. Sequence analysis of a unique aberrant SSCP has allowed us to identify a point mutation cosegregating with MHS in the described family. The mutation changes a conserved tyrosine residue at position 522 to a serine residue. This mutation is positioned relatively close to five of the six MHS/CCD mutations known to date and provides further evidence that MHS/CCD mutations may cluster in the amino terminal region of the RYR1 protein.
Detection of a novel RYR1 mutation in four malignant hyperthermia pedigrees.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalational anaesthetics and depolarizing muscle relaxants. To date, six mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) have been identified in malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) and central core disease (CCD) cases. Using SSCP analysis, we have screened the RYR1 gene in affected individuals for novel MHS mutations and have identified a G to A transition mutation which results in the replacement of a conserved Gly at position 2433 with an Arg. The Gly2433Arg mutation was present in four of 104 unrelated MHS individuals investigated and was not detected in a normal population sample. This mutation is adjacent to the previously identified Arg2434His mutation reported in a CCD/MH family and indicates that there may be a second region in the RYR1 gene where MHS/CCD mutations cluster.
Single strand conformational polymorphism analysis was used to screen exons 43 and 44 in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene from 17 positively diagnosed members of families in which chromosome 19-linked malignant hyperthermia (MH) was segregating. A polymorphism in two unrelated individuals was found to result from the substitution of A for G7297, leading to the substitution of Arg for Gly2433. This mutation is adjacent to a mutation (Arg2434 to His) previously linked to MH and central core disease (Y. Zhang et al., Nature Genet. 1993, 5, 46-50). Subsequent screening showed the presence of the mutation in four of 106 MH families tested and its absence from about 1000 other chromosomes. The mutation was present in all six individuals in four families who had had an MH reaction, in two obligate carriers and in 10 individuals diagnosed as MH susceptible by the caffeine/halothane contracture test (CHCT). The mutation was present in an individual with a normal response to the CHCT and was absent in three individuals with a positive CHCT response. These discrepancies would be consistent with inaccuracies in the CHCT and/or with segregation of a second MH allele within two of the four affected families.
The substitution of Arg for Gly2433 in the human skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor is associated with malignant hyperthermia.
Detection of a novel common mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene in malignant hyperthermia: implications for diagnosis and heterogeneity studies.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalational anaesthetics. To date, the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) has been shown to be mutated in a small number of malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) cases. To determine if a common RYR1 mutation exists that might account for a significant number of MHS cases, we have investigated the RYR1 gene in unrelated patients for the presence of new mutations by the single-stranded conformation polymorphism method and have identified a novel Gly341Arg mutation which accounts for approximately 10% of Caucasian MHS cases. The implications of this common mutation in MHS diagnosis and heterogeneity studies are discussed.
Central core disease (CCD) is a morphologically distinct, autosomal dominant myopathy with variable clinical features. A close association with malignant hyperthermia (MH) has been identified. Since MH and CCD genes have been linked to the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, cDNA sequence analysis was used to search for a causal RYR1 mutation in a CCD individual. The only amino acid substitution found was an Arg2434His mutation, resulting from the substitution of A for G7301. This mutation was linked to CCD with a lod score of 4.8 at a recombinant fraction of 0.0 in 16 informative meioses in a 130 member family, suggesting a causal relationship to CCD.
Central core disease (CCD) of muscle is an inherited myopathy which is closely associated with malignant hyperthermia (MH) in humans. CCD has recently been shown to be tightly linked to the ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) and mutations in this gene are known to be present in MH. Mutation screening of RYR1 has led to the identification of two previously undescribed mutations in different CCD pedigrees. One of these mutations was also detected in an unrelated MH pedigree whose members are asymptomatic of CCD. The data suggest a model to explain how a single mutation may result in two apparently distinct clinical phenotypes.
Mutations in the ryanodine receptor gene in central core disease and malignant hyperthermia.
The RYR1 gene encoding the Ca2+ release channel of human skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum has been cloned and exon/intron boundaries have been determined, together with a minimum of 30 bp of intron sequence flanking each splice junction. The gene contains 106 exons, of which two are alternatively spliced. The length of the gene, determined by the alignment of 16 genomic phage clones, a cosmid clone, and several long polymerase chain reaction products, is approximately 160 kb. Exons range from 15 to 813 bp, while introns range from 85 to about 16,000 bp. Analysis of the gene has confirmed published errors in the human RYR1 cDNA and confirmed the structure of two alternatively spliced exons. The numbering of the nucleotides comprising the RYR1 cDNA and the numbering of amino acids encoded by them were corrected to account for these earlier errors and omissions. Analysis of 2.4 kb of the 5' upstream sequence indicated the presence of a CCAAT box and several Sp1 binding sites between nucleotides -200 and -60 bp, flanking the proposed transcription start site at -130 bp. Several other potential transcription factor binding sites were identified throughout the 5' sequence. Knowledge of the structure of the RYR1 gene will provide an invaluable resource for the discovery of mutations in the gene that are causal of human malignant hyperthermia and central core disease.
&lt;h4&gt;Background&lt;/h4&gt;Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal, often autosomal dominant, disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalational anesthetics. In this article, the authors describe a malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) kindred in which both parents of the proband are MHS and are first-degree cousins. Haplotype analysis in this kindred with chromosome 19 linked markers revealed that the proband and another sibling were homozygous for the affected RYR1 allele.&lt;h4&gt;Methods&lt;/h4&gt;Eighteen members of this large pedigree were investigated, with a clinical examination for signs of a myopathy, a caffeine halothane contracture test, a histo-enzymologic study on the muscle biopsies, and linkage analysis on genomic DNA isolated from family blood samples. RYR1 cDNA was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and was cloned and sequenced, facilitating mutation detection.&lt;h4&gt;Results&lt;/h4&gt;Linkage analysis demonstrated linkage between RYR1-linked markers and MH susceptibility in this family. DNA sequencing identified a T to C transition at nucleotide position 103, resulting in the substitution of an arginine for cysteine 35, representing the most N-terminal mutation reported to date in the RYR1 gene. This mutation segregates fully with the MHS trait, generating a lod score of 4.65 in favor of linkage to MHS at a recombination frequency of 0.0.&lt;h4&gt;Conclusions&lt;/h4&gt;The proband in this kindred is the first reported homozygote to have presented with an MH episode. The homozygotes in this pedigree do not have an overt myopathy. The sensitivity of muscle samples to caffeine clearly distinguished the two homozygotes from other heterozygous-susceptible individuals. No clear differentiation was observed with the halothane contracture results.
Defects in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene are associated with malignant hyperthermia (MH), an autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and one of the main causes of death resulting from anaesthesia. Susceptibility to MH (MHS) is determined by the level of tension generated in an in vitro muscle contracture test (IVCT) in response to caffeine and halothane. To date, mutation screening of the RYR1 gene in MH families has led to the identification of eight mutations. We describe here the identification of a novel mutation, Arg552Trp, in the RYR1 gene, which is clearly linked to the MHS phenotype in a large, well characterised Irish pedigree. Considering that the RYR1 protein functions as a tetramer, correlation of the IVCT with the affected and unaffected haplotypes was performed on the pedigree to investigate if the normal RYR1 allele in affected subjects contributes to the variation in the IVCT. The results show that the normal RYR1 allele is unlikely to play a role in IVCT variation.
Detection of a novel mutation in the ryanodine receptor gene in an Irish malignant hyperthermia pedigree: correlation of the IVCT response with the affected and unaffected haplotypes.
Detection of a novel mutation at amino acid position 614 in the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant disorder of skeletal muscle and is triggered in susceptible people by all commonly used inhalation anaesthetics and depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents. To date, eight mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene (RYR1) have been identified in malignant hyperthermia susceptible (MHS) and central core disease (CCD) cases. We have screened the RYR1 gene in affected individuals for novel MHS mutations by single stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and have identified a G to T transition mutation which results in the replacement of a conserved arginine (Arg) at position 614 with a leucine (Leu). The Arg614Leu mutation was present in three unrelated MHS individuals of 151 investigated. The mutation was not detected in 148 normal chromosomes and segregated precisely with MHS in family members from one of the probands where DNA was available for analysis. This mutation occurs at the same position as the previously identified Arg to Cys mutation reported in all cases of porcine MH and in approximately 5% of human MH. A comparison of the phenotypes of the Arg614Leu and Arg614Cys probands is presented.
Novel mutations at a CpG dinucleotide in the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia.
Identification of novel mutations in the ryanodine-receptor gene (RYR1) in malignant hyperthermia: genotype-phenotype correlation.
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle that is triggered in genetically predisposed individuals by common anesthetics and muscle relaxants. The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is mutated in a number of MH pedigrees, some members of which also have central core disease (CCD), an inherited myopathy closely associated with MH. Mutation screening of 6 kb of the RYR1 gene has identified four adjacent novel mutations, C6487T, G6488A, G6502A, and C6617T, which result in the amino acid alterations Arg2163Cys, Arg2163His, Val2168Met, and Thr2206Met, respectively. Collectively, these mutations account for 11% of MH cases and identify the gene segment 6400-6700 as a mutation hot spot. Correlation analysis of the in vitro contracture-test data available for pedigrees bearing these and other RYR1 mutations showed an exceptionally good correlation between caffeine threshold and tension values, whereas no correlation was observed between halothane threshold and tension values. This finding has important ramifications for assignment of the MH-susceptible phenotype, in genotyping studies, and indicates that assessment of recombinant individuals on the basis of caffeine response is justified, whereas assessment on the basis of halothane response may be problematic. Interestingly, the data suggest a link between the caffeine threshold and tension values and the MH/CCD phenotype.
